The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Faery Queen and Her Knights, by Alfred
John Church


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Faery Queen and Her Knights
       Stories Retold from Edmund Spenser


Author: Alfred John Church



Release Date: October 17, 2017  [eBook #55765]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAERY QUEEN AND HER KNIGHTS***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Stephen Hutcheson, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this file
      which includes the original lovely illustrations in color.
      See 55765-h.htm or 55765-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/55765/55765-h/55765-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/55765/55765-h.zip)


Transcriber’s note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).





THE FAERY QUEEN
AND HER KNIGHTS

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO
ATLANTA · SAN FRANCISCO

MACMILLAN & CO., Limited
LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd.
TORONTO


[Illustration: The Slaying of the Dragon.]


THE FAERY QUEEN AND HER KNIGHTS

Stories Retold from Edmund Spenser

by the

Rev. ALFRED J. CHURCH, M.A.

Author of “Stories from Homer”

With Illustrations in Colour






New York
The Macmillan Company
1909
All rights reserved

Copyright, 1909,
By the Macmillan Company.
Set up and electrotyped. Published October, 1909.

Norwood Press
J. S. Cushing Co.—Berwick & Smith Co.
Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




CONTENTS

     CHAP.                                                             PAGE
        I. The Red-Cross Knight                                           1
       II. Archimage and Duessa                                           7
      III. The Fortunes of Una                                           16
       IV. Of what befell at the House of Pride                          24
        V. How the Red-Cross Knight leaves the Castle of Pride           29
       VI. The Lady Una and the Satyrs                                   35
      VII. Of the Giant Orgoglio                                         42
     VIII. Of the Deeds of Prince Arthur                                 49
       IX. Of the House of Holiness                                      55
        X. Of the Slaying of the Dragon                                  64
       XI. Of Sir Guyon and the Lady Medina                              71
      XII. How Sir Guyon came into Great Peril                           77
     XIII. Of Two Pagan Knights                                          89
      XIV. Of Queen Acrasia                                              96
       XV. Britomart                                                    102
      XVI. Of Merlin’s Magic Mirror                                     109
     XVII. How Britomart took to Arms                                   117
    XVIII. Sir Scudamore and Amoret                                     127
      XIX. Of Sir Paridell and Others                                   135
       XX. The Story of Canacé and the Three Brothers                   142
      XXI. The Story of Florimell                                       153
     XXII. Of the False Florimell                                       160
    XXIII. Sir Satyrane’s Tournament                                    168
     XXIV. Of Florimell’s Girdle                                        176
      XXV. Of Britomart and Artegall                                    180
     XXVI. Of the Fortunes of Amoret                                    190
    XXVII. Of Sir Artegall and the Knight Sanglier                      197
   XXVIII. Of Other Adventures of Sir Artegall                          202
     XXIX. Sir Artegall does Justice                                    214
      XXX. Radigund                                                     221
     XXXI. How Sir Artegall was Delivered                               233
    XXXII. Of the Knave Malengin                                        247
   XXXIII. Of the Lady Belgé                                            252
    XXXIV. Of Sir Artegall and Grantorto                                263
     XXXV. Of Sir Calidore and the Lady Briana                          270
    XXXVI. Of the Valour of Tristram                                    278
   XXXVII. Sir Calepine and the Lady Serena                             286
  XXXVIII. Of Sir Calidore and Pastorella                               294
    XXXIX. The End of Sir Calidore’s Quest                              301




                         LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


  The Slaying of the Dragon                               _Frontispiece_
                                                             FACING PAGE
  The Red-Cross Knight and Sansfoy                                    10
  The Lady Una and the Lion                                           20
  Sir Guyon and the Men in Bestial Shapes                            100
  Agapé approaching the Dwelling of the Fates                        142
  Sir Scudamore overthrown by Britomart                              184
  Sir Artegall and the Saracen                                       204
  Prince Arthur slaying the Seneschal                                256




                            THE FAERY QUEEN
                            AND HER KNIGHTS




                               CHAPTER I
                          THE RED-CROSS KNIGHT


Once upon a time there might have been seen a gentle Knight, riding
across the plain. He was clad in armour of proof, and on his arm he
carried a silver shield. A shield it was that brave men had carried
before him, for there were great dints upon it, which were as a witness
of great fights that had been fought. Now the Knight himself had never
yet been in battle; but he seemed as one who could bear himself bravely,
so well did he sit upon his horse, and so stout of limb he was. On his
breast he wore a cross, red as blood, in token that he was vowed to
serve the Lord Christ, who had died for him; and on his shield was yet
another cross, to be as it were a sign that this service should be a
defence to him in all dangers. Somewhat sad of look he was, not as
though he had fear in his heart, but rather as one upon whom had been
laid the burden of a great task. And such, in truth, there was, for
Queen Gloriana had sent him upon a great enterprise, and all his heart
was full of the thought of how he should best accomplish it. And the
task was this—to slay the Great Dragon.

Beside the Knight a lady was riding on an ass as white as snow. Very
fair she was; but she hid her fairness under a veil, which was brought
low over her face. She was clad also in a garment of black; and she,
too, was somewhat sad of look, nor, indeed, without cause. She came of a
royal stock, being descended from ancient kings and queens, who had held
wide sway in their land until this same Dragon had driven out their
ancient house and had cruelly wasted all their realm. The third of this
company was a Dwarf, who lagged behind, wearied, it may be, with the
weight of the bag in which he bore this fair lady’s gear.

While the three, to wit the Knight, and the Lady, and the Dwarf, passed
on, the sky was suddenly covered with clouds, and there began to fall a
great storm of rain, so that they were fain to seek some shelter.
Gladly, then, did they espy a wood hard by that promised, so thickly
grown it was, a shelter from the rain. Tall were the trees and spreading
wide with shady branches, so that neither sun by day nor star by night
could pierce through. And all about were paths and ways, worn as by the
treading of many feet, which seemed to lead to the abodes of men—a
fairer place of shelter, as it seemed, there scarce could be. So they
passed along, the birds singing sweetly the while; overhead were trees
of many kinds, trees of the forest and of the orchard, the cedar and the
oak, and the elm with the vine clinging to its stem, the yew for bows,
and the birch for arrows, and the fruitful olive. So fair was the place,
and so full of delights, that the travellers took no heed of the way by
which they went. So it came to pass that they strayed from the path by
which they first entered the wood, nor could they win to it again when
once they had left it, so many were the ways and so like the one to the
other. After a time, when they had taken counsel together, it seemed
best to choose the way which seemed most trodden by the feet of
travellers, as being the likeliest to lead to a certain end. When they
had followed this awhile, they came to a great cave, deep in the very
thicket of the wood. Here the Knight sprang from his horse, and gave to
the Dwarf his spear, thinking that he should not need it. But his sword
he kept.

Then said the Lady Una, for that was her name: “Be not overbold, Sir
Knight; there may be mischief here of which you know nothing, peril
which gives no sign of itself, even as a fire which burns without smoke;
hold back, I pray you, till you have made some trial of the place.”

The Knight made reply: “Fair lady, it were a shame to fall back for fear
of a shadow. The cave, doubtless, is dark, but where there is courage
there is not wanting a light for the feet.”

Then said the Lady again: “Nay, nay, Sir Knight; I know this place by
repute, though I thought not of it before. This wood in which we are
lost is the Wood of Wandering; this cave which you see before you is the
Den of Error, a monster, hateful both to God and man. Beware, therefore,
beware!” And the Dwarf cried out aloud in his fear: “Fly, Sir Knight,
fly, this is no place for mortal man.”

But the Knight would not be persuaded. He stepped into the cave, and the
light of day, shining from without on his armour, showed him dimly the
monster that was within. Hideous it was to behold, half a serpent and
half a woman, and all as foul as ever creature was, upon the earth or
under it. All the length of the cave she lay, her tail wound in many
coils; and in every coil there was a deadly sting. And all round her was
a brood of young ones. Many different shapes they had, but hideous all.
And as soon as the light from the Knight’s armour glimmered through the
darkness, they fled for shelter to the mouth of their dam.

The monster, wakened from her sleep, curled her tail about her head, and
rushed to the cavern’s mouth, but, seeing one armed from top to toe in
shining mail, would have turned again. But the Knight leaped at her,
fierce as a lion leaps upon his prey, and barred her backward way with
his sword. First she darted at him her great tail, and threatened him
with the deadly sting that lay in it; but he, not one whit dismayed,
aimed at her head a mighty blow. Her head it wounded not, but glanced on
to the neck with force so great that for a while the great beast was
stunned. Then, coming to herself, she raised her body high from the
ground, and leaped upon the Knight’s shield, and wrapped his body round
with huge folds.

Then Una, seeing in how sore plight he was, cried out: “Now show, Sir
Knight, what you are. Put out all your force, and, above all things,
back your force with faith, and be not faint. Strangle this monster, or
surely she will strangle you!”

Greatly was his heart stirred within him with grief and anger, and,
knitting all his strength together, he gripped the creature by the
throat so mightily that she was constrained to loosen the bonds which
she had cast about him. And yet, it had well-nigh cost him dear to come
so close to the monster, so foul she was. And of this foulness the worst
was this, that she caused to come forth out of her mouth, as in a flood,
the brood which had taken shelter therein at the first. Serpents they
were, like to their dam, small indeed, but full of venom, and they
swarmed over him, twining themselves about his arms and legs, so that he
could not strike a blow nor even move. So, in some still eventide, a
shepherd, sitting to watch his flock, is suddenly assailed by a cloud of
gnats; feeble creatures they are, and slight their sting, but they
suffer him not to rest. The Red-Cross Knight was in a strait more dire,
for these evil creatures had power to do him a more grievous harm. But
he thought to himself, “Shall I be vanquished in this fashion?” He was
somewhat moved by the danger wherein he stood, but more ashamed that he
should be overcome in so foul a fashion. So, resolved in his heart that
he would put all his strength into a stroke, either to win or to lose,
he gathered himself together, and struck the monster with a blow so
fierce that he shore the head from the body, and she fell dead upon the
ground.

Then said the Lady Una: “Well, indeed, have you carried yourself, Sir
Knight. Surely you were born under a lucky star, seeing that you have
overcome so terrible a foe. You are worthy of these arms wherewith you
are clad. So is your first adventure brought to a good result. God grant
that you have many such in the time to come, and that they may be
brought to as happy an ending.”

Then the Knight sprang upon his horse, and the Lady Una mounted again
her ass, and the Dwarf followed as before. And now they kept with
steadfast purpose to the one way which they saw to be most trodden,
turning neither to the right nor to the left, how fair soever the path
might seem. So at last they came to the outskirts of the Wandering Wood,
and journeyed once more across the plain.




                               CHAPTER II
                          ARCHIMAGE AND DUESSA


So the two, the Knight and the Lady, rode on, the Dwarf following as
before. After a while they chanced to meet an old man by the road. He
was clothed in black and barefooted, and he had a long white beard, and
a book was hanging from his belt. A very wise old man he seemed, sober
and even somewhat sad, and as he went along he seemed to be praying; and
now and again he would beat upon his breast, saying, “God be merciful to
me a sinner!” He made a humble reverence to the Knight, and the Knight
in his courtesy made his salute, and said: “Sir, do you know of any
adventure that a Christian man may undertake?”

“My son,” said the old man, “how should one who lives in his cell and
tells his beads and does penance for his sins know aught of wars and
enterprises by which glory may be won? Nevertheless, I can tell of a
very evil man who dwells in these forests and wastes all the
country-side.”

“Ah!” cried the Knight, “it is for such an adventure, the setting right
of wrong, that I seek. Bring me to this villain’s dwelling and I will
reward you well.”

“Willingly,” said the old man, “will I guide you thither, but the way is
long and painful.”

“And surely,” said the Lady Una, “you are wearied with your late
encounter. I take it that he who lacks rest lacks strength, however
stout of limb he be. Take your rest then with the sun, and begin your
new work with the new day.”

“This is wise counsel, Sir Knight,” said the old man, “and wise counsel
ever wins the day. The day is far spent; come, then, and take such poor
entertainment as my home can give.”

With this the Knight was well content. So they followed the old man to
his dwelling. It was a lowly hermitage, in a valley, close to the
forest, with a chapel hard by, and by this chapel a brook crystal clear.
Humble was their fare, but the rest after the day’s toil made it sweet
enough, as also did the old man’s talk, for he discoursed of many things
and many men, saints and popes, and the great deeds which they had done.
Then, as the night drew on and sleep began to fall upon their eyes, he
showed them the places where they should lodge for the night.

Now this old man, who seemed so pious and good, with his long white
beard, and his prayers, and his beating of his breast, was really a
wicked magician. So soon as he had taken his guests to their lodgings,
he went to his study, where he kept his books of charms with other
contrivances of his art, and taking one of these books from the shelf on
which it stood, opened it, and began to mutter some dreadful words which
it were a great sin for anyone to write or read. With these he brought
up from their dwelling-place in the lower parts of the earth a very
legion of evil spirits. To these he gave a part of his evil work to do,
and some of this work he kept to himself; and the work was this: To
cheat the hearts of those whom he wished to deceive with false dreams
and visions. What these were, it is best not to tell: let it be enough
to say that they wrought such doubts concerning the Lady Una in the
heart of the Red-Cross Knight that, as soon as the morning dawned, he
rose from his bed, and clothed himself with all haste, and crying for
the Dwarf that he should bring him his horse, rode away as fast as the
beast could carry him.

He had not ridden many miles before there met him a paynim knight. A
tall warrior and a strong he was, armed from top to toe, and carrying a
great shield on which were written in scarlet letters the words “_Sans
Foy_,” which, being interpreted, mean “Without Faith.” With him there
rode a fair lady, clad also in scarlet, with ornaments of gold and
necklaces of coral, and on her head a Persian cap set round with crowns
of gold. Her horse also had gay trappings, and her bridle was set with
bells of gold, which tinkled bravely as she rode. So soon as she saw the
Red-Cross Knight she said to her companion, “See now, here comes your
enemy; make ready.”

No sooner had she spoken, but he stuck spurs in his horse, and rode at
the Red-Cross Knight. Nor did the knight hold back from the fray, for he
also put his spear in rest and charged. So the two met fully and fairly,
with so fierce a shock that the two horses stood, as it were, struck to
stone, and the riders were borne backwards in their saddles, holding
each of them in his hand his broken spear. Then the Saracen drew his
sword from the scabbard, and addressed himself again to the fray. So did
the Christian also; blow for blow did they deal one to the other, till
the sparks flew from their shields, and when they chanced to strike
home, the blood flowed forth and dyed the earth under their feet. After
a while cried the Saracen: “Now curse upon that Cross which keeps your
body from harm! You had been dead long since but for that magic power.
For all that, I bid you now beware, and keep safe your head if it may
be.”

So saying, he dealt a blow so fierce that it shore away half the
Christian’s crest, yet glancing down upon the shield harmed him no more.
Yet was it not struck in vain, for it roused him of the Red Cross to
such rage that he made a more than like reply. Full on the Saracen’s
helmet he dealt his stroke. Right through the steel it passed, and cleft
the head, so that the Saracen fell a dead man from his horse.

When the lady saw her champion fall, not a moment did she stay to see
how it had fared with him, either to tend his wounds, or to weep for his
death, but fled away as fast as her horse could carry her. Then the
Red-Cross Knight, crying to the Dwarf that he should pick up the dead
man’s shield to be a memorial of the fight, rode after her, and
overtaking her, bade her halt: “You have no cause to fear, fair lady,”
he said.

[Illustration: The Red Cross Knight and Sansfoy.]

Then she, turning back, cried aloud: “Fair Sir, have mercy on an unhappy
woman!”

Much was he moved to see her humbleness, for she was beautiful to look
on, and richly clad, as one of noble birth might be. “Lady,” said he,
“be of good heart. It pitieth me to see you in such distress; tell me
now who you are, and whence you come, and who was this your champion?”

“Sir,” she answered, weeping the while, “I have suffered much from evil
fortune. I was the only daughter of an emperor, who had wide dominion
over the land of the West, setting his throne where flows the famous
stream of Tiber. Being such, I was betrothed in my early youth to the
only son and heir of a most wise and mighty king. Never surely was
prince so fair and faithful as he, never one so gentle and debonair. But
alas! ere the day appointed for our marriage came, my lord fell into the
hands of cruel enemies, and was most foully slain. When this ill news
came to me, I said to myself: ‘Now will I at least do due honour to the
dear body of him whom I loved.’ So I set forth from my father’s house
upon this quest. Long did I wander over the world, a virgin widow, nor
did I find that for which I sought. At last I chanced to meet this
Saracen, who now lies dead upon the plain. He constrained me to go with
him, and would fain have won me for his wife, but I ever said him nay.
And now he lies dead. An evil man he was, one of an evil brotherhood of
three—Sansloy, the eldest; Sansjoy, the youngest; and this Sansfoy, of
middle age between the two.”

“Be contented, fair lady,” answered the Knight; “you have done well. You
have found a new friend and lost an old foe. Friend, be he ever so new,
is better, I trow, than foe, new or old.”

So the two rode on, he making merry with gay talk, as became a courteous
knight, and she, with much modest show of bashfulness. After a while
they came in their journey to two fair trees, which spread their
branches across the road. Lovely trees they seemed, and fair was the
shade which they cast. Yet was the place held in ill-repute of all the
country-side; never did shepherd sit beneath them to rest or play upon
his oaten pipe, for all men held it to be unlucky ground. But of this
the good Knight knew nothing, so, the sun being now high in heaven, and
of so fierce a heat that a man might scarcely abide it, he dismounted
and bade the lady do likewise, so that they might rest awhile, and anon,
in the cool of the evening, might pursue their journey. So the two sat
them down and talked.

Now the Knight, being in a merry mood, said to himself: “Surely, this is
the fairest of women; it is meet that she should be crowned.” So saying,
he plucked a branch which he would have shaped into a garland for the
lady’s head. Then, lo! from the place where the branch had been plucked
came trickling drops of blood, and there issued forth a lamentable voice
which said: “Stranger! Tear not in this cruel fashion the tender human
limbs which are covered by the bark of this tree. Fly also from the
place, fly, lest haply the same fate should come upon you as came upon
me in this place, both on me and on the dear lady also who was my love.”

Much was the Knight astonished to hear such words, and for a while he
stood speechless. Then he said: “What ghost is this from the world
below, what wandering spirit that talks in this strange fashion?”

Then there came this answer: “No ghost am I from the nether world, nor
wandering spirit of the air. I was a man, Fradubio by name, as now I am
a tree, being charmed by the arts of a wicked witch. But I am yet a man,
for I feel the winter cold and the summer heat in these branches, even
as a man might feel.”

Then said the Knight: “Tell me now, Fradubio, be you tree or man, how
you came to suffer in this fashion. It is good for a man to tell his
trouble; he who hides it in his heart makes his griefs to be twice as
great.”

Then did Fradubio tell his tale, “Know, stranger, that I suffer this
trouble through the arts of a false sorceress, Duessa by name; nor I
only, for she has brought many knights into a like evil case. In my
youth, which indeed is not long passed, I loved a fair lady, whom you
may see, not indeed in the fashion of a lady, but as yonder tree which
joins its branches with these. Once upon a time, when I was riding
abroad with her, I chanced to meet a knight, who also had a fair lady
for a companion. A fair lady I called her, and so she seemed, but she
was in truth this same false witch Duessa. Said the strange Knight: ‘I
do declare that this lady is the fairest dame in all the world, and this
I will make good with my sword and spear against all the world.’ For the
witch had cast her spells over him and deceived him. And when I put
forth the same challenge for my own lady, we fell to fighting, and he
fared so ill, that he fell by my hand.

“So now there were two fair ladies, for so it seemed, Fraelissa, who was
fair in truth, and Duessa, who by her wicked arts had made herself so to
seem. And I knew not to which I should give the prize of beauty, for it
seemed the due of each. But while I doubted, this wicked witch raised by
evil arts such a mist as made Fraelissa’s face to lose all its fairness.
Which when she had accomplished, she cried: ‘See now how this false dame
has lost her beauty, for indeed it was but borrowed. Many has she
deceived in time past, even as now she has deceived you.’ When I heard
this, I would fain have killed the fair lady that had been my true love.
But this the false Duessa, feigning compassion, would not suffer. Only
with her magic arts she changed her into that tree which you see yonder.

“Now you must know that for every witch, be she as crafty as she may,
there is one day in every year when she is constrained to take her true
shape. And on this day I chanced to see Duessa as she was in truth, old
and foul of hue, fouler than one had thought woman could be. Nor did she
fail to perceive that I had discovered the truth, though indeed I sought
to bear myself as before, having it in my mind secretly to escape, and
fly from her company. So she practised upon me the same wicked arts that
she had used with my Fraelissa, changing me into the semblance of a
tree. And here we stand, banished from the company of men, and wasting
weary days and nights.”

“But,” said the Knight, “how long shall this endure? What is the
appointed end of your sufferings?”

“We must here abide till we shall be bathed in a living well,” Fradubio
made answer.

“Can I find this same well?” asked the Knight.

“That shall be as the Fates may decree,” said Fradubio.

All this Duessa—who called herself Fidessa—heard, and knew it for truth.
She well-nigh fainted for fear; but the time for the discovering of her
falseness was not yet.




                              CHAPTER III
                          THE FORTUNES OF UNA


While the Red-Cross Knight was thus faring, the Lady Una was not a
little troubled that she should have been so left by her champion. Never
did she cease to search for him, wandering the while over plain, and
forest, and mountain, and not one whit afraid, however desolate they
were.

On a certain day she lighted off the ass, on which she was wont to ride,
and laid herself down to rest in a solitary place, under the shadow of a
tree; she took the covering from her head, and laid aside her black
cloak; her faithful beast grazed hard by, for there was much grass in
the place. As she lay, there rushed out of the wood with which the
meadow was circled about a furious lion. Wild he was with hunger, and
was hunting for prey. And when he saw the royal maid, he ran greedily at
her with open mouth, as if he would have devoured her; but when he came
near, and saw what manner of maid she was, all his rage departed from
him. He kissed her weary feet, and licked with his tongue her lily
hands, crouching down before her as if to show himself her servant. At
the first sight of the beast the Lady Una was not a little afraid, but
when she saw how gently he bore himself, she sighed and said: “See now,
how this lion, who is the king of the forest, forgets his hunger and his
rage in pity of my sad state, while he who was my champion leaves me to
wander alone.” So she spake till she could speak no more for very tears,
and the lion meanwhile stood looking upon her. Then—for the lady was of
a brave spirit—she shut up her sorrows in her heart, and mounted on her
steed again, and set out once more upon her quest. It was a long and
weary way which she went, through divers places, where there were no
inhabitants, and still the lion went with her, ready to guard her
against all dangers. While she slept, he watched over her, and when she
awaked he awaited her command, watching her eyes so that he might
discern her pleasure.

After long journeying, in which they saw no sign of the presence of man,
they came to a place which, from the wearing of the grass, seemed to be
trodden by human feet. And in no long time the lady espied a woman, who
was following the path with slow steps, and carrying on her head a
pitcher of water. The lady cried to her, “Tell me now, my friend,
whether there may be any dwelling near to hand, where I may rest
awhile?” But the woman answered her never a word, seeming as if she
could neither understand nor speak. But when, turning her eyes, she saw
the lion by the lady’s side, she threw down her pitcher, and fled as
fast as her feet could carry her. Not once did she look behind her, but
fled as if for her life till she came to the house where she dwelt with
her mother, a blind woman. Not a word did she say, but her fear was
plain to see, and the old woman perceived that there was some great
danger at hand, so when they two had shut the door they hid themselves
in the darkest corner of the cottage.

In a short space of time came Una and her lion to the door. Thereat the
lady knocked, but when no one answered, and the time was passing, the
lion in his impatience rent the wicket-gate with his claws and let her
in. No further hurt did he, and when Una had with much gentle speech
allayed the women’s fear, they laid themselves down to sleep.

But when the night was far spent, there came one to the door demanding
entrance, and when this was not speedily given him, using many oaths and
curses. He was a sturdy thief, by name Kirkrapine, that is to say,
Robber of Churches, and this indeed was his trade. He was wont to steal
away the ornaments of churches, and to strip off from the images of the
saints the vestments with which they were clad, and to purloin the robes
of the priests, and to break open the boxes in which were put the alms
for the poor. No small share of the plunder did he bring to the house
where Una lay that night, for he was the lover of the old woman’s
daughter, and he could never give her enough of gold and jewels and
precious things. But whether the old woman knew of the matter none can
tell, though it might have seemed that such doings were not to her mind,
seeing that she told her beads and prayed both by day and by night; nine
hundred Paternosters would she say daily, and of Ave Marias twice as
many. Thrice in the week, also, did she sit in ashes; thrice three times
she fasted from all food and drink, and she wore sackcloth nearest to
her skin.

Now when this same Kirkrapine found that, for all his cursing, he could
not win an entrance, for, indeed, though the women heard him, they were
hindered from rising by fear of the lion, he let fly furiously at the
door and brake it down, and would have entered. But as he was about to
cross the threshold, the beast, thinking that his lady was in danger,
sprang at him, and brought him to the ground, and so tore him that he
died, which, having done, the lion came back to his place by the lady’s
side, and watched her as before.

When the day broke, the Lady Una rose from her place, and went forth
from the cottage, and journeyed onwards still seeking the Knight, and
the lion went with her. The old woman also and her daughter, so soon as
the house was clear of its guests, rose up. But when they found
Kirkrapine lying dead before the door, great was their grief and greater
still their anger.

“This,” they cried, “the savage beast has done,” and they followed with
all the speed they might use, and so overtook her. Harm her they might
not, for they feared the lion, and when they had cursed her loud and
long they turned back to go to their own house.

As they went they met a knight, fully clad in armour. But yet he was no
knight but only the wizard Archimage, who had taken upon himself, by
help of his wicked arts, the semblance of the Red-Cross Knight. The
false knight asked them whether they had seen a lady journeying alone.

“Yea,” the old woman answered, “such I have seen; an evil woman she is,
and much harm hath she wrought.” And she told a piteous tale of the
things which she had suffered. This done, she showed him the way by
which he must go, if he would overtake the lady, and he, having thanked
her with due courtesy, rode on. Nor was it long before he overtook the
Lady Una, for she, having but an ass for her steed, travelled slowly.
When she saw him, and noted the Red Cross on his shield and the like
emblem on his breast, she said to herself: “Now God be thanked, I see my
true champion again,” and she rode to meet him, and greeted him with
friendly words, saying: “Where have you been these weary days, my lord?
I have fared ill without your company,” and she told him of all the
troubles and dangers through which she had passed.

On the other hand, the false knight spoke her fair: “For this cause I
left you, dearest lady, that I might seek an adventure of which
Archimage told me, and how I might deal with a felon who had done great
harm to many gallant knights. And, indeed, I did deal with him, so that
he shall hurt such knights no more. I pray you, fair lady, to pardon me
that I left you awhile, even for such cause, and to take me once more as
your faithful servant and champion.”

[Illustration: The Lady Una and the Lion.]

So the two rode on together. They had not travelled many miles when they
saw coming to them, riding at the full speed of his horse a knight fully
armed. When he came near they saw that he was a man of very fierce
aspect, and that he carried on his shield the name _Sansloy_. Fierce as
he was of look, he grew fiercer yet when he perceived the false knight’s
shield, how it had the badge of the Red Cross. Not a word did he speak,
but he laid his spear in rest and rode fiercely forward.

Sorely dismayed was Archimage, and loath to meet the stranger in battle,
for, indeed, he was not used to bearing arms. Yet could he not hold back
for very shame. The Lady Una also looked at him that he should bear
himself bravely. But it fared ill with him, and, indeed, it would have
fared worse but that his steed, being no less timorous than himself,
held back in the onset, so that the shock of their meeting was the less
fierce. Nevertheless, he was thrown to the ground, where he lay helpless
and without defence.

The strange knight leapt lightly from his horse, and made as though he
would have slain his adversary. “Ha!” he cried, “so he that slew the
brave knight Sansfoy, my brother, has come by his deserts. Sansfoy he
slew, and by Sansloy he shall be slain!”

Then he began to unlace the man’s helmet as he lay upon the ground, but
the Lady Una cried, “Oh, Sir Knight, hold your hand; is it not enough
that you have vanquished him? He lies there at your mercy. Therefore
have mercy upon him. Verily there is not in the whole world a truer
knight than he.” But the stranger had no mind to hold his hand, for,
indeed, he had no compassion within his heart. But when he had ended the
unlacing of the helmet, and was now ready to strike, he saw the hoary
head and wrinkled face of Archimage, and cried: “What is this that I
see, Archimage, luckless sire? By what ill-fortune have you come across
me in this fashion? Is the fault with me or with you, that I should have
dealt with a friend as though he were an enemy?”

So he spake, but not a word did the wizard answer. He lay in a swoon,
and the shadow of death was on his face. And now the Lady Una had come
and was looking into the old man’s face. Sore dismayed she was and sore
vexed; for he whom she had taken for her champion was a deceiver; nor
could she divine how she might escape from the hand of this paynim
knight. And now she had to bear yet another grief. For when Sansloy laid
a rude hand upon her and bade her descend from her steed, and caught
away her veil that he might look upon her face, the lion, not enduring
to see his mistress so handled and treated, sprang at the knight, but
alas! what was he to withstand a knight clad in armour of proof, with
spear and sword? Soon did Sansloy thrust him through with the iron
point, so that the faithful beast fell dead upon the ground, and the
lady was left helpless and without defence.




                               CHAPTER IV
                  OF WHAT BEFELL AT THE HOUSE OF PRIDE


The Red-Cross Knight rode on with the false Fidessa, not knowing that
she was indeed the witch Duessa, who had changed the unhappy Fradubio
into a tree. After a while they came to a road which was manifestly much
frequented of men, and following this beheld before them a very stately
palace. “Come,” said Duessa, “let us seek shelter here, for I am weary
with my journeying and the day is far spent.”

It was, indeed, a very noble house, cunningly built of bricks laid
artfully together without mortar. It had very lofty walls, but they were
as slight as they were high, overlaid with shining gold, with many
towers rising from them, and goodly galleries disposed among them, and
spacious windows. No one could blame the skill of the architect that had
planned it, or of the builders that had raised it up, so fair it was to
look upon; yet it was passing strange that it had been built in a place
so ill chosen, to wit, upon a sandy hill, so that the foundations were
ever slipping away from it; and when the winds blew upon it it was
shaken most perilously, and the lower parts, for all that they were
painted so as to make a very brave show, were ruinous and old.

They passed by the porter, whose name was Malvenu, which being
interpreted is “Ill come,” without challenge, and so came into the hall.
This was right richly arrayed with arras and cloth-of-gold, and was
filled from end to end with a great crowd of people of all sorts and
degrees, waiting, all of them, for a sight of the lady of the house.
These also they passed, as being guests to whom special honour was due,
and so were brought into the presence of the lady, where she sat with as
fair and richly-clad a company of knights and dames about her as ever
was seen upon the earth. High on a throne, splendid in royal robes and
ornaments of gold and jewels costly beyond all count, sat the lady. Fair
she was, so fair that throne and robes and gold and gems were as nothing
in comparison with her beauty. Under her feet was a great dragon, and in
her hand she held a shining mirror of brass, and her name was Lucifera.
She was, indeed, the Queen of Pride, and all her brave show was a false
seeming, and her kingdom a kingdom of unrighteousness.

The Knight, not knowing what the lady truly was, and false Duessa, to
whom all these things were well pleasing, being introduced by a certain
usher of the court, Vanity by name, bowed themselves low before the
throne. And the Knight said, “Lady, we are come to see your royal state,
and to prove the report of your great majesty which has gone through all
the world.” “I thank you,” said the lady, but in a disdainful way, for
she did not so much as cast her eyes upon them, nor did she bid them
rise. On the other hand, the knights and ladies set themselves with much
heartiness to entertain the new-comers. The knights were right glad to
welcome among them a companion so fair and so stalwart, and to the dames
the false Duessa was well known. Nevertheless the Knight was but ill
pleased that the Lady Lucifera should show such scant courtesy to a
stranger. “She is overproud,” he thought to himself, “and there is too
much of vain show in these her surroundings.”

While he was thus thinking, the lady rose suddenly from her place, and
said that she would ride abroad, and bade call for her coach. A stately
coach it was, like to that which, as it was said of old, Queen Juno rode
with six peacocks, spreading out great starry tails, for horses. Six
steeds had this Queen also, but they were but ill matched, and on each
of them did ride one of the six counsellors who advised her in affairs
of state, and the six were Idleness, and Gluttony, and Lust, and
Avarice, and Envy, and Anger. The false Duessa followed close after the
Lady Lucifera, for she was of a kindred spirit, but the Knight, though
he knew not all the truth, yet held aloof from the rout, not liking
their company. When they had tarried awhile in the fields, breathing the
fresh air of the country-side, they turned back to the palace. There
they found a Saracen knight newly come, who carried on his shield the
name _Sansjoy_. He was ill-favoured and ill-conditioned, as one who bore
a grudge against his fellows. But when he saw how the page of the
Red-Cross Knight carried a shield on which was written the name of
_Sansfoy_, then was he filled with fury, and sprang upon the lad and
wrenched it from him, which the Red-Cross Knight perceiving, being ill
content so to lose the trophy which he had won in fair fight, ran at the
Saracen, and recovered that which was his own. Already had they drawn
their swords to fight out their quarrel hand to hand, when the Queen
Lucifera interposed her high command: “Sirs,” she said, “I command you
on pain of my high displeasure to forbear. To-morrow, if you will, you
shall prove in fair fight to whom this shield, for which I perceive you
contend, in right belongs. Meanwhile I bid you be at peace.”

“I beg your pardon, noble Queen,” said the Saracen, “for that I have
thus broken the peace of your court; in truth I could not refrain myself
when I saw this false knight possessing the shield of the brave
_Sansfoy_, whom he slew not in fair fight, but by magic arts, ay, and
not possessing it only, but that he might do it dishonour, commanding
that it should be publicly borne.” So spake Sansjoy, but the Red-Cross
Knight said nothing; he was a man of deeds, not of words. Only he threw
his gauntlet on the ground, to be a pledge that he would meet his
adversary in the field.

Then, for evening was now come, all sat down to the banquet. Right
royally did they feast, for Gluttony was steward that night, and ordered
their meat and drink; and when they had feasted to the full, they betook
themselves to their beds, and Sloth was their chamberlain. But before
she slept Duessa made Sansjoy aware that she was no friend to the
Red-Cross Knight.




                               CHAPTER V
          HOW THE RED-CROSS KNIGHT LEAVES THE CASTLE OF PRIDE


It is ever the way with noble hearts, that they cannot rest till they
have fully accomplished that which they purpose to do. So all night long
the Red-Cross Knight considered with himself how he should most wisely
bear himself in the morrow’s fight, and so considering he waited till
the morning light should shine upon the earth. So soon therefore as the
sun appeared in the sky he rose from his bed, and arrayed himself in his
armour, making ready for his combat with the Saracen. This done, he
descended into the castle hall, where there was already gathered a great
crowd of men, who had come to see what the issue of the day should be.
There were musicians making melody on harps and viols, and bards who
were ready to celebrate in song the strength and valour of him who
should win the victory. After him by no great space of time came the
Saracen, clad in chain armour. Fierce was his look, as though he would
strike fear into his adversary, but the Knight was of a temper which no
looks could dismay. Then the pages brought in two cups of wine from
Greece, and mingled therein spices from farthest India, for such was the
custom of the place. It was to kindle the champions’ courage forsooth,
but neither Christian nor Saracen, I take it, had need of such
encouragement. And as they drank they sware a solemn oath that they
would duly observe the laws of honourable war.

This done, the Queen Lucifera came with a great train of knights and
ladies, and took her seat upon the throne which had been set for her
with a great canopy over it. Before her was an open space, railed in on
every side, that none should be near either to help or to hinder the
champions. Over against the Queen was set another throne, of less
account and dignity. On this was set false Duessa. And on a tree hard by
was hung the shield of Sansfoy, and a laurel crown which should be the
conqueror’s meed.

And now was heard the shrill note of a trumpet, and the two champions
addressed themselves to the battle. Each man carried his shield on his
left arm, and took his sword in his right hand, for such was the order
of the fight, that for a speedier issue they should lay aside their
spears and take at once their swords. Both knights were sturdy and
brave, and long they fought without advantage gained. Stroke was
answered with stroke, while the sparks flew from either shield, and each
helmet showed the dints where the steel had been well-nigh broken
through. Neither did this champion or that escape without harm, for the
blood was seen to flow out and dye their coats of mail, but neither
suffered such a wound as to hinder him from the fight, nor did the crowd
that watched them know which would prevail. And now it chanced that the
Saracen, as he shifted his place, caught the sight of his brother’s
shield, where it hung upon the tree, to be the conqueror’s prize. The
sight stirred him to a double rage: “Ah! brother,” he cried, “dost thou
sit so long by that dark lake of death the while thy shield hangs here
to be the prize of victory? Go, caitiff,” so he cried, as he turned him
to the Red-Cross Knight, “go and tell him that I have redeemed his
shield from shame.” And as he spoke, he smote upon the crest of the
Knight a mightier stroke by far than he had ever dealt. Twice did the
Knight reel as he stood; twice was he ready to fall; while all that
watched were assured that the battle was indeed won and lost, and the
false Duessa cried aloud: “Well done, Sansjoy; the shield is yours, and
I and all.” But when the Knight heard the voice of the lady—for he knew
not yet her true quality—he raised himself from his swoon, and his faith
that had waxed weak grew strong again, and the chill departed from his
limbs. Wrath and shame and love wrought such new strength within him,
that he struck his foe with a stroke so mighty that it brought him to
his knee. “Ah! thou miscreant,” he cried, “go now and take yourself your
message to this dear brother, and tell him that the conqueror has his
shield.” But when he would have dealt yet another blow, and so ended the
fight beyond all doubt, lo! there was a dark cloud over all the place,
and the Saracen was nowhere to be seen. He called him aloud, but there
came no answer. The darkness had swallowed him up. Then the false Duessa
came down from her seat and entreated him with many words: “O most
valiant Knight that ever lady chose for her champion, abate now your
rage; your adversary lies low; be content with your victory.” But not
one whit was his wrath diminished; willingly would he have driven his
sword-hilt deep into the body of his enemy, so finishing his work. But
nowhere could he espy him. While he stood wondering, the trumpets
sounded again, now with a note of victory, and heralds came and paid him
homage, making low obeisance to him, and giving into his hands the
shield. After this they took him to the Queen, where she sat upon her
throne; and he, bending his knee before her, made proffer of his
service, which she accepted with much courtesy of thanks. This done, she
returned to the palace, having the Knight by her side, the people
following with loud shouts and much rejoicing.

And now, because his wounds were many—for not without much cost of pain
had he won this victory—they laid him in a bed and bound up his hurts,
pouring in oil and wine, the while the musicians made sweet music to
comfort him in his sickness. While he thus lay, Duessa resorted to a
certain witch of whom she had knowledge, and told her of how the
Christian Knight had slain Sansfoy, and now had stricken Sansjoy
well-nigh to death, and prayed her help. So the two returned together to
where the Saracen lay, still covered with the magic cloud. They bound up
his wounds, and laid him in the witch’s car, and carried him to hell to
the dwelling of Æsculapius. Now this Æsculapius was a great physician in
the days of old, and because he had brought to life again a certain man
who had been unjustly slain he had suffered grievous punishment. He
could not die, for he was of immortal race, but he had been struck down
to hell with a thunderbolt. There he had lain, age after age, striving,
if it might be, to heal his own hurts. To him, therefore, the witch and
Duessa brought Sansjoy, and prayed him that he would recover him of his
deadly hurt. “Nay, nay,” said he, “you ask what may not be. You tempt me
to do again the very thing for which I suffer all this pain. Shall I
again, with a like deed, renew the wrath of him that so dealt with me?”

The witch made answer: “What more can you suffer than you have suffered
already? You hope for nothing; what then should you fear? You are in
this lowest deep; is there a lower to which you can fall? Deny not my
prayer; rather show the power which has given you your great renown in
heaven and on earth and in hell itself.”

“Be it so,” he said. So they brought the knight, and the great physician
used all his arts, applying to the man’s wound all the healing powers
that he knew. Then Duessa, having accomplished her purpose, so far as it
might be done, journeyed back to the Palace of Pride, but when she came
thither she found that the Red-Cross Knight had departed.

Now the cause of his going was this. He was not, indeed, fit for travel,
nor had his wounds been duly healed, but he might not stay, having heard
what his faithful Dwarf had told him; and the thing was this, that there
were dungeons beneath this fair castle, with all its splendid
furnishing, in which lay a crowd of prisoners in most miserable plight,
men of the old times and of the new, such as were Nimrod the great
hunter, and the lords of Babylon and Nineveh, and great chiefs of Rome,
all who by wicked pride had sinned against God and man. This had the
watchful Dwarf espied. And when the Knight heard the tale he would tarry
no longer, but that very hour, while it was yet dark, for it would have
gone ill with him had he been espied, he fled from the castle. By a
bye-way he fled, and lo! it was so full of the corpses of men that he
and the Dwarf could scarce make their way, for though the castle was
fair in all its public parts, those that were secret were foul beyond
all thinking.




                               CHAPTER VI
                      THE LADY UNA AND THE SATYRS


Though the wizard Archimage was an ill companion for the Lady Una, yet
was Sansloy, by whom he was overthrown, a worse. They had not travelled
together far when he said, “Lady, deign, I pray you, to show me that
fair face of yours. I would fain know for whom I have done battle.
Yours, I ween, is such beauty as the old villain whom I overthrew was
not worthy to take in charge.” And when she answered him not a word, he
stretched forth a lawless hand, and would have torn the veil from her
face. Then she cried aloud. “Ay,” said he, “cry if you will; there is
none to help you here.” But even while he spoke there came running out
of the wood, which was hard by, a great multitude of strange creatures,
fauns and satyrs, half man and half beast. They were dancing and making
merry in the forest, which is their natural dwelling-place, and when
they heard the cry, one said to another: “This is the cry of some mortal
in distress, and it has the note of a woman’s voice; let us see what is
the cause.” So they made all haste to the place from which the cry came.
And when the Saracen beheld them he was sore afraid. Such creatures he
had never seen in all his life; so he sprang upon his horse, and fled as
fast as he could. Nor, indeed, was the Lady Una wholly quit of her
fears. So it may chance that when a wolf carries off a lamb, and drops
it for fear of a lion, the lamb may be in no better case. But when the
strange creatures saw by the lady’s face that she was sore afraid, they
tried to show their goodwill towards her; they threw themselves upon the
ground and kissed her feet, and sought to show her that they were her
dutiful servants. So, gathering courage, she raised herself from the
earth on which she had thrown herself in fear and distress, and made
signs that she would go with them. So they led her through the wood,
dancing and shouting and singing; and some strewed branches of trees on
the ground before her, and one, who was a chief among them, put a crown
of olive leaves about her head. So they led her to their chief Sylvanus,
and he, waked from his sleep by their shouting, came forth to meet them,
leaning on a staff of cypress wood, and having a rope of ivy knitted
about his middle. When he saw her, much did he marvel who she could be.
“This is not Venus,” he said to himself, “for Venus never was in so
sober a mood; no, nor Diana, for I see not her bow and arrows and the
buskins up to her knee.” And while he stood and wondered, the nymphs
flocked in to see, nymphs of the fountains and the woods, and they whose
lives are bound to a single tree, living while it lives and dying when
it dies. Nor were they less astonished, but they were ill pleased that
one so fair should come among them: “Who of the wood folk,” they said to
themselves, “will think of us when this mortal maid is near?”

Many days Lady Una tarried with this strange folk, and not unwillingly,
for it was as it were a breathing time, giving her rest from the long
toil of her journey. And while she tarried she strove to the utmost to
teach them something of the Christian faith: but ever she had much ado
to keep them from the worshipping of herself. And when she had scarcely
kept them from this, they turned to worship her ass.

After a while there came into these parts a certain knight, Satyrane by
name, so called because he was the son of a prince among the satyrs, but
his mother was of the race of men. He was brought up in the woods, far
from all human company; nor did he learn letters or any craft
whatsoever, but only to be ever of a good courage and to banish fear. So
he would lay his hand on lions and bears, and tame the wild bulls of the
forest, riding on them as one might ride upon a horse. And he grew to be
so swift of foot that he would overtake the roebuck in his flight. ’Tis
said that once when his mother came to see him, for she had gone back to
dwell with her own kind, she saw him carrying in his arms the cubs of a
lioness which he had carried away from their dam, while the creature, in
its rage, followed him, roaring aloud, yet dared not spring, so well did
all the beasts of the forest know and fear him. When he grew to years of
manhood he was not content with the conquest over wild beasts, or with
life in the wood far from man. He went therefore into distant lands
seeking adventures, in which he acquitted him so well that no man could
boast of having overthrown him. Yet it was his custom from time to time
to return to his old dwelling-place to see his old father and to rest
awhile from his labours. And so coming now, he chanced to find the Lady
Una sitting with a company of the forest folk around her, teaching them
holy things. Much he marvelled to see how fair she was, and more did he
marvel at the wise and gracious words that came from her lips; for,
indeed, by this time, being by nature of a lively wit, he had himself
learnt many things. So he gladly sought her company, and would fain be
her disciple and learn the ways of righteousness and peace from her
lips.

After certain days the Lady Una, seeing that this Satyrane was an
honourable knight and worthy of trust, said to him, “I would fain go on
with journeyings, if haply I may find my champion.” “Lady,” he made
answer, “I am bound to do your pleasure; it shall be as you say.” So
having watched for a time when the forest folk were away, he took her
through the forest till they came to the plain beyond. When the day was
now far spent they spied a traveller on the road, and judging from his
look and garb that he had come from far, hastened towards him, hoping
that they might by chance hear something that would help them in their
quest. He was an old man of low estate, as it seemed, his garments worn
and soiled with much dust from the road, his sandals torn with much
travelling, and his face bronzed by the sun, as if he had travelled long
in Arabian or Indian land. A staff he carried in his hand, and on his
shoulders hung a wallet in which he carried such things as were needed
for his journey.

Satyrane said to him: “Friend, have you aught to tell me of wars and
adventures in these or in foreign parts, for indeed you seem to have
come a long way?” “Nay,” answered the stranger, “I am a simple man, and
know nothing of such matters.” Then said the Lady Una: “Tell me now
whether you have seen or heard aught of the champion whom I am seeking?
He bears a red cross on his armour.” The old man answered: “Fair lady,
truly I have seen such an one with these eyes, and a sorry sight it was,
for he lay dead upon the ground.” When the Lady Una heard these words
she fell to the earth in a swoon. When Satyrane with much care had
brought her back to life, she said: “Friend, tell me all that you know;
one who has borne the greater pain may well endure the less.”

The old traveller answered: “On a certain day—an evil day it was, and I
am grieved that I ever lived to see it—as I chanced to be passing on my
way, I saw two knights contending fiercely together; one was a Saracen,
and the other bore a red cross on his shield, and he that carried this
device was slain.” “Oh to think,” cried the Lady Una, “that he should be
thus overcome, he that was so stout and brave. How could such an evil
chance befall?” “That I know not, fair lady,” said the old man; “I can
but relate the thing which I saw with mine eyes.” Then said Satyrane:
“Tell me now, old man, where is the Saracen knight that did this deed?
Is he far from hence or near at hand?” The old man made answer: “You may
find him not far from here. I left him but a short time ago sitting by a
fountain where he washed his wounds.”

The knight Satyrane, having further inquired by what way he should go,
made all haste to find the Saracen, fearing lest haply he should have
departed. And, indeed, he found him, sitting by the fountain side under
the shade of a tree, for it was Sansloy, the same that had overthrown
Archimage. And Satyrane cried aloud: “Rise from your place, accursed
miscreant, you that by some unknightly craft and treachery have slain
the Red-Cross Knight, for I know well that you could not have overcome
him in fair fight. Rise up, and either maintain your cause in arms, or
confess your guilt.” The Saracen, when he heard these words, rose
quickly from his place and put his helmet on his head, and took his
shield upon his arm, and drew near to his adversary. But first he said:
“Truly you have been sent hither in an evil hour to fight a quarrel that
is not yours. And, indeed, you blame me for a deed which I have not
done. The Red-Cross Knight I slew not, nor indeed did I engage in fight
with him. Someone who falsely bore his arms I overthrew. But come now,
if you may not fight in his quarrel, fight in your own.”

Then the two men came together in fierce encounter. When they were at
the hottest of the fray, the Lady Una came to the place, for Satyrane
had left her behind in his haste. And when she saw the Saracen she said
to herself: “Now what shall I do if this false villain should get the
upper hand of Satyrane?” And the thought struck such terror into her
heart that she straightway turned and fled from the place. And the old
traveller, who had told the false tale of the slaying of the Red-Cross
Knight, followed her, for, indeed, he was none other than Archimage.




                              CHAPTER VII
                         OF THE GIANT ORGOGLIO


When the false Duessa came back to the Palace of Pride from the journey
which she had made in the matter of Sansjoy, she found that the
Red-Cross Knight had departed. Thereupon she set out without delay,
being altogether unwilling that he should escape out of reach of her
nets. Nor, indeed, was it long before she found him, sitting by the side
of a spring in the shade of a tree. He had put off his armour by reason
of his weariness and of the heat of the day. “You did ill to leave me in
that ill place Sir Knight,” she said, “for ill I found it to be, even as
you did yourself.” Then he excused himself with courteous words, and so
peace was made again between the two.

Now the spring by which the Knight was taking his rest was not as other
springs, but there lay a curse upon it, because the nymph which dwelt
therein had fallen out of favour with her mistress, Diana. And the cause
of her so falling was this. On a certain day, as Diana and her train
were following the chase, the nymph of this spring, being wearied with
the heat and toil of the day, sat herself down to rest. With this her
mistress, being very keen in her hunting, was ill pleased: “Maid,” she
cried, “you are dull and slow; such, then, shall these waters be for
ever, ay, and whosoever shall drink of them.” Of this the Knight knew
nothing, but because the waters were crystal clear and cold, and his
thirst was great, he drank a great draught. And as he drank, the powers
of body and soul grew faint and feeble, but by slow degrees and
unperceived. Ere long there came to his ears a loud bellowing sound
which made the trees to tremble and the very earth to shake. The Knight
leapt from the ground, and would have armed himself, but yet, such was
the working of that magic spring, was strangely slow. Certain it is that
ere he could don his armour or thrust his arm into the fitting of his
shield, there came stalking along with mighty stride the most fearsome
giant that ever was seen on the face of the earth. His stature was
thrice that of man, and in his right hand he carried an oak tree which
he had torn from the earth by its roots. It served him for a staff
whereon to stay his steps, and for a mace with which to slay his foes.
So soon as he spied the Knight he came against him with the oak tree
lifted in his hand. On the other hand, the Knight made a vain show of
battle, but the strength had departed from his arm, and the heart in him
failed for fear. He lifted his sword, indeed, but he had no power to
strike. Then the giant aimed at him a mighty blow, such as would have
levelled to the ground a tower of stone. Verily, but for the grace and
help of God, it had ground him to powder, but he leapt from under it,
yet its very wind laid him prostrate on the ground. When the giant saw
him lie helpless in this fashion, he lifted his hand again as if to slay
him, but the false Duessa, who, for her own ends, would not have the
Knight perish in this fashion, cried aloud: “O Orgoglio, greatest of all
creatures under the sun, slay him not, but make him your thrall and
slave.” The giant listened to this prayer. He took the Knight in his
arms and carried him to his castle, and there threw him into a dungeon
that had been dug deep into the earth. There he lay for a while, with
such scant provision of meat and drink as sufficed to keep the life in
him.

The faithful Dwarf had seen his master fall, for he had the Knight’s
war-horse in charge, while the beast was grazing in the meadow hard by.
And now, the giant having departed with his prisoner, he gathered
together the arms and the armour, for these Orgoglio had left lying on
the ground as taking no account of such things. There was the helmet and
the cuirass, and the greaves and the shield with the cross upon it, and
the spear—things sad to behold, now that there was none to wear or wield
them. He laid them on the back of the war-horse, and so departed. He had
not gone far before he met the Lady Una herself. When she saw him and
the war-horse and the burden which it bore, there was no spirit left in
her, so that she fell without sense to the ground. Willingly would the
faithful Dwarf have died, knowing what ill tidings he bore, and seeing
how ill they were taken. Nevertheless he did not lose heart, but with
much pain and care sought to recover the lady from her swoon. Thrice did
he bring her back to life, and thrice she fell as one dead to the
ground. At last, when the spirit within her had somewhat recovered
itself, she said with faltering tongue: “Tell me now, faithful friend,
the whole story from the beginning, how it is that I see these relics of
the bravest knight that ever was. Verily Fortune has spent all her spite
upon him and me. Worse than that which I feel in my heart I cannot hear.
Begin your tale and carry it to the very end. If haply it shall be in
aught less dreadful than what I fear, so much I shall have gained.”

Then the Dwarf rehearsed from the beginning all that had befallen the
Red-Cross Knight from the time of their parting, the deceits of
Archimage and the wiles of the false Duessa, and the fate of the two
lovers who had been changed to trees, and the Palace of Pride, and the
combat with Sansjoy, and how the Knight had been taken unprepared by the
giant Orgoglio.

To these things the lady listened with attentive ear, and when the Dwarf
had ended his tale she said: “Verily I will seek him as long as I live.
Lead on, and show me the way that I must go.” So they travelled both
together.

They had not journeyed far before they met a knight riding on the way
with his squire behind him. Never was there more gallant warrior or more
gallantly arrayed. His armour shone like the sun, and across his breast
he wore a baldrick richly adorned with precious stones. Costly were they
all, but one among them shone most excellently, a great diamond like to
the head of a fair lady, brighter than all the rest, even as the star of
evening is brighter than all the hosts of heaven. His sword hung from
his side in a sheath cunningly made of ivory; its hilt was of burnished
gold, and its buckle also of gold. The crest of his helmet was a great
dragon, with wings spread out on either side, and above the crest a
horse-hair plume, which waved to and fro as an almond tree waves its
blossoms in the breath of spring. But the great marvel of his equipment
was his shield. It was not made of iron or of brass, as are the shields
of common men, but of one great diamond. Only it was covered up from
sight. When he would dismay some huge monster, or strike with fear some
great array of the enemy, then he would show its brightness. No power of
man, no enchantments, strong and subtle as they might be, could prevail
against it, or diminish aught of its power, for indeed it was made by
the greatest magician that ever lived upon the earth, even Merlin.

The gallant knight spake full courteously to the Lady Una, asking if he
could help her or serve her in aught. “Oh, Sir,” she answered, “my
sorrow is so great that it is past all remedy. What would it profit to
tell the tale? ’Tis best to hide it in my heart nor stir the hidden
grief.”

“Nay, lady,” answered the knight, “I doubt not that your grief is great,
but I would counsel you to tell the tale for all it is so sad. Pain is
ever lessened, be it ever so great, by wise counsel, and he who will not
reveal his trouble may never find help.”

So they spake together, he persuading her to reveal her sorrow and she
unwilling to bring it to the light, till at last, yielding to his words
of wisdom, she told her tale.

“I am the daughter,” she said, “the only child of a king and queen whose
kingdom lies far by the river Euphrates. Long did they reign in great
prosperity, till a great dragon, bred in the lakes of Tartary, wasted
their land till there was nothing left of all that belonged to them,
save the one castle in which they dwelt, and to this the dragon has laid
siege now for the space of four years. Many knights have taken in hand
this enterprise, to subdue the dragon and to deliver those whom he
oppresses. From every country under heaven have they come, brave men and
famous for great deeds, but they have failed, one and all. For want of
faith or for the hidden weakness of some secret sin they have fallen
before him. At last there came to our land a report of certain famous
knights that had been bred in this realm of Fairy Land. Thereupon I
betook myself thither, even to the Court of Queen Gloriana, who dwells
in the City of Renown, hoping that I might there find some faithful
knight who should deliver my father and mother from the power of the
tyrant. Nor did I go in vain. It was my good fortune to find a gallant
knight who was fit and willing to undertake this task. Unproved indeed
he was, but he was of a fair body and a noble soul. It was he who set
forth upon this enterprise. Of his prowess I saw full many a proof. Yea,
the sword and the spear which you see on the back of yonder steed might
tell, if they could speak, of the great deeds which he has wrought. But
by ill chance he encountered a most false magician, by whose arts he was
betrayed. First this vile creature made division between my knight and
me, so that he misdoubted of my faith. Next he delivered him to the
wiles of a certain false woman, Duessa by name. And she has betrayed him
into the hands of a great and terrible giant, Orgoglio by name. And in
this giant’s dungeon he now lies pining to death. This is my grief, Sir
Knight, and greater, surely, never woman bore.”

“Your grief is indeed great,” answered the stranger knight; “but be of
good cheer. I will never leave you till I have set your champion free.
Come now, let us bring this matter to an end.”

So they rode on together with the Dwarf for their guide. The name of the
gallant knight who bore the shield of diamond was Arthur.




                              CHAPTER VIII
                     OF THE DEEDS OF PRINCE ARTHUR


When they had travelled a score of miles or so, they came to a castle
which was built very high and strong. Thereupon the Dwarf cried out,
“This is the place in which my good lord lies a prisoner, the thrall of
the giant Orgoglio.” Thereupon the Prince Arthur alighted from his
steed, and said to the Lady Una, “Stay here, madam, and await the issue
of this day’s combat.” Then, at his bidding, the squire came near to the
wall of the castle. He found the gates fast shut, with no warder to
guard them, nor was there any to answer when he called. Then the squire
took in his hand a bugle that he bore, that hung by his side with a
chain of gold decked with gay tassels. It was a bugle of wondrous power;
for three miles it could be heard, and there came out of space three
answers to its blast, nor could anyone in whose heart there was aught of
falsehood endure to hear it without dismay, nor could any bolt or bar,
however stout they might be, withstand its summons. This bugle, then,
Prince Arthur’s squire sounded before the giant’s castle. And it was
shaken straightway from the foundation to the topmost towers, and the
doors flew open of their own accord. The giant himself was much troubled
at the sound, and came with staggering steps, as one smitten with a
sudden fear, to see what it might mean. And after came the false Duessa,
riding on a many-headed beast, with fiery tongues, for such a monster
the giant had given her for her own.

Prince Arthur without delay addressed himself to the fight. Nor did the
giant draw back, being persuaded that no mortal man could stand up
against him and prevail. He thought, indeed, to slay him with a single
blow, and lifted up his mighty club. But the Prince was wise and wary,
and, lightly leaping aside, he escaped the stroke unhurt, for he thought
it no shame to use his craft against brute strength. As for the club, so
missing its aim, it sank deep into the earth, making a furrow a yard
deep and more. The giant pulled at it amain, seeking to lift it for
another stroke, but could not prevail, so fast was it buried. The
knight, therefore, had him at a disadvantage, and smote him with his
sword so deadly a stroke that it shore off his arm. Loud did he bellow
with fear and pain, and Duessa, seeing her champion in sore distress,
made the great beast on which she sat advance against the Knight. But
now Prince Arthur’s squire, a gallant warrior, worthy of such a lord,
stood forth and, with his single sword, barred the way. In high disdain
to be hindered by so weak a foe Duessa yet again urged on the beast, but
still the squire stood firm; he would not give place a single step lest
the enemy should so gain an advantage against his lord. Then Duessa had
recourse to her magic arts, for she took of the magic juices which she
ever carried with her, and sprinkled them upon the youth, and quenched
his courage and robbed him of his strength, so that he could neither see
nor stand. So he fell all his length upon the earth, and the beast laid
his deadly claws upon his neck, and would have crushed the life out of
him. But the Knight, perceiving his evil plight, turned quickly from his
own adversary, and addressed himself to the beast, for, indeed, it
grieved him much that his faithful squire should have come into such
peril of his life. So, lifting high the sword with which he had smitten
the giant, he smote the beast upon one of its heads, making the blood
pour out amain. But when the beast, writhing to and fro in its pain,
would have shaken Duessa from her seat upon its back, and she cried out
in her fear, the giant came to her help. He was, indeed, of no common
nature, nor was he disabled by the wound which would have bereft all
other creatures of strength. In the one hand which was left to him there
dwelt the strength of the two, and now being free to use again his club
of oak, he lifted it up high and dealt such a blow at Prince Arthur’s
shield that it brought him to the ground. But now by this very stroke
the Knight’s deliverance was wrought, for the covering was torn from the
shield by its violence, and all its brightness was revealed. With so
great a splendour did it blaze into the giant’s eyes that he dropped his
arm and let fall the club with which he was ready to slay his adversary.
The beast also was blinded by that brightness, and fell reft of its
senses on the ground. Nor when Duessa cried aloud to the giant in her
fear could he render effectual help. With stroke after stroke the Prince
lopped from him limb after limb, till he lay dead upon the ground. And
then this marvel came to pass. This creature which had seemed so vast
seemed to vanish away. As for Duessa, she sprang from off the beast, and
would have fled away upon her feet. But this the squire would not
suffer, for, pursuing her with speedy feet, he laid hold of her and
brought her back to the Prince to await his judgment.

And now the Lady Una, who in fear and trembling had watched the combat
from a distance, came near and thanked both Knight and squire for the
good service which they had rendered. “I cannot repay you,” she said;
“may Heaven give you your reward and with usury. Suffer me to say one
thing. Let not this false woman depart, for, indeed, she is the cause of
all the mischief that has been wrought.” Then Prince Arthur said to his
squire: “Take this woman in charge; I will go seek the Red-Cross
Knight.” So he departed on this errand, and, entering the castle, sought
someone of whom he might inquire. No one did he find, and though he
called aloud, there was none to answer. At last there came forth an old
man leaning on a staff with which he guided his steps, for the sight of
his eyes had failed him long since, and carrying a great bunch of keys,
but all of them overgrown with rust. His name was Ignaro. A reverend
sire he seemed, and the Knight asked him with all courtesy: “Who are
they that dwell in this place, and where may they be found?” “I cannot
tell,” he said. Then the Prince asked again: “Where, then, is the Knight
whom the giant Orgoglio holds in thrall?” “I cannot tell,” said he
again, nor did he say any other words. The Prince’s anger rose at this
foolishness, but he checked it as should a courteous knight, and, taking
the keys from the old man’s hand, essayed to open the doors, nor did
they delay to yield. Great riches he found within—store of gold, and
tapestry finely wrought, and much splendid furnishing; but the floor was
foul with blood. Vainly did he search through all the chambers; the
prisoner he could not find. At last he came to an iron door. It was fast
locked, nor was there a key upon the bunch that would open it. But in
the door there was a grating of iron bars. Through this he called aloud:
“Dwells there anyone in this place, for I will set him free?” To this
there came a low voice making this reply: “Who is that who comes? Three
months have I lain in this foul dungeon, and if you bring me death
itself I would choose it rather than to stay in this place.” When the
Prince heard these words he was overcome with horror and pity; not the
less, gathering up all his strength, he smote the door, and brake it
from its hinges. But when the opening was made, lo! on the other side
was no floor but only a deep pit, dark as night, from which there came
up a loathsome smell. But neither the pit nor the darkness nor the vile
stench abated the Prince’s courage. With much pains and toil he drew up
the prisoner from the pit. Sadly wasted was he. He could not stand upon
his feet, and his eyes, deep sunk in the sockets, could not bear to look
upon the light, and his arms that had been so staunch and strong in the
old time were wasted to the bone. So the Prince carried him to the
castle door. And when the Lady Una saw him, she was filled with pity and
ruth and would have comforted him: “Welcome, my lord,” she cried, “whom
I have so long desired to see. Soon shall you have a recompense for all
that you have suffered.” “Dear lady,” he made answer, “we will not speak
of the evil that is past; only let us beware that we fall not into it
again. For, indeed, there is engraven in my heart, as with a pen of
iron, this true saying: ‘Happiness may not abide in the heart of mortal
man.’”

As for the false Duessa, they were content to strip her of her robes and
ornaments. And fouler creature to behold there never was. Then the
knights and the squire and the Lady Una tarried awhile in the castle,
where they found all things that they needed. So they took for sundry
days a rest from their toil.




                               CHAPTER IX
                        OF THE HOUSE OF HOLINESS


The time was now come when, having rested sufficiently, the Red-Cross
Knight must set forth again, and Prince Arthur, being bound for another
land, must bid his companions farewell. Then said the Lady Una: “Tell us
now your name and nation, for it would be a great loss not to know to
whom we owe so great a debt.” “Fair lady,” said he, “you ask me that
which it passeth my wit to answer. This only do I know, that so soon as
I was born I was taken by a knight of Fairyland to Timon, now the
wisest, as he was once the most expert, in arms among living men, by him
to be brought up in all virtuous lore and noble accomplishment. To his
house the great Merlin would often come, for he had the chief charge of
my upbringing, and he, when I asked him of my family, answered: ‘Be
content; you are the son and heir of a king, as shall be made manifest
in due time.’” “And how,” said the Lady Una, “came you here seeking
adventure?” “You bid me renew an unspeakable grief,” he answered. “There
was a time when I laughed at the name of Love, and thought scorn of all
that suffered from its power. But there came a time when I myself
confessed it. On a certain day, being wearied out with sport, I laid me
down to sleep. And in my sleep I dreamt a dream. The Queen of Fairyland
stood by my side and told me that she loved me and would show her love
when the time should come. Such was my dream; whether it was false or
true I know not—only that never in this world did man see so fair a
sight or hear words so sweet. And when I woke I vowed in my heart that I
would seek her, and never rest till I had found her. Nine months have I
sought her, but in vain.” The Lady Una said: “Happy Queen of Fairies
that has found so gallant a champion!” and the Red-Cross Knight said: “O
sir, to whom I owe my life, if ever man was worthy of such love, you are
surely he!”

And now the time was come when they must part. Prince Arthur gave to the
Knight a box of diamonds set in gold, wherein were drops of a wondrous
liquid of a virtue so excellent that it could heal the most grievous
wounds. And the Knight gave to the Prince a book in which the Gospels
were written in golden letters.

They had not journeyed far when they were aware of a knight, in complete
armour, riding towards them as fast as his horse could gallop. He seemed
to be flying from an enemy or from some dreadful thing, for, ever and
anon, he cast a look behind him as though an enemy were close at his
heels. When he came near they saw that his head was uncovered, and that
his hair bristled with fear, while his face was as pale as death, and
that round his neck was a rope of hemp, which, indeed, ill agreed with
his shining armour. But he made no account, so overcome with fear was
he, either of rope or of arms. The Red-Cross Knight rode as fast as he
could so as to meet him as he fled, and said to him: “Tell me, Sir
Knight, what has befallen you? From whom do you flee? Never have I seen
knight in such evil plight.”

Not a word did the stranger speak, but stood staring widely out of stony
eyes. But after a while he gathered strength to speak, but full low, and
with faltering words: “For the love of God,” he said, “gentle Knight,
hinder me not: he comes; see! he comes after me, as fast as he can
ride.” But the Red-Cross Knight held him fast, and using now comfort and
now reproach, at last put some little heart into him, so that he could
tell his tale, and the tale was this—

“I chanced of late to be in company with a gentle knight, Sir Terwin by
name. He was a man of good repute for courage and skill in arms, but he
fared ill in one matter, in that he loved a fair lady who had but little
love for him, but rather took pleasure in seeing him languish and
lament. On a certain day as we were coming away from the lady’s
dwelling—for he had been paying her court, and had been most
disdainfully treated—we met a stranger who greeted us courteously, and,
as we fared on together, told us many wonderful tales of great
adventures. When he had in this way won our regard, he inquired with a
show of friendship of our condition, and when he had heard the same, and
knew that we suffered not a little distress in this matter of love, for
I, too, was not less troubled in this respect than was my friend, he
began to talk to us in the most gloomy fashion, taking from us all hope
of relief, and in the end counselling us to end our troubles with death.
And that we might do this the more easily, he gave to me this rope and
to Sir Terwin a rusty knife. With this said knife Sir Terwin, unhappy
man that he was, forthwith slew himself; but I, whether I was more faint
of heart or more fortunate I know not, fled away with all speed.”

“I would see this fellow,” said the Red-Cross Knight, “and deal with him
according to his deserts.”

“Nay,” said the other, whose name was Trevisan, “I counsel you not to go
within hearing of his speech, so powerful is he to persuade.” And when
the Red-Cross Knight was urgent to go, Sir Trevisan answered: “To do
your pleasure, friend, I will show the place, but I myself would sooner
die than enter.”

So they two rode together, and the Lady Una with them, till they came to
the place. It was a gloomy cave in the side of a rock, on the top of
which there sat an owl making a doleful screech. By the side of the cave
were stocks of trees without leaf or fruit, but with the carcases of men
hanging upon them, and on the ground beneath were other bodies, which
had fallen down by lapse of years. Sir Trevisan would have fled when he
saw the place, but the other would not suffer it. They entered the cave
and saw the man sitting on the ground within. His grisly hair fell in
long locks about his neck, and his eyes were deadly dull and his cheeks
sunken, as if it were with hunger and grief. His garments were dirty and
patched, being fastened together with thorns. And on the ground beside
him there lay the corpse of a man, newly slain, whose blood had not yet
ceased to flow from the wound. Then said the Red-Cross Knight, “What say
you, wicked man, why you should not be straightway judged for the evil
deed which you have done?” “What words are these, stranger?” said the
man, “and what judgment is this? Why should he live who desires to die?
Is it against justice that a man should have his due? Or, again, to
speak of charity rather than justice, is it not well to help him over
that comes to a great flood, or to free the feet that stick fast in the
mire? He that lies there enjoys the rest which you desire and cannot
have. Somewhat painful the passage, it cannot be denied, yet how great
and how sweet the rest! Is it not well to endure short pain for so long
a happiness? Sleep after toil, port after stormy seas, ease after war,
death after life, what better can you ask?”

“Nay,” answered the Knight, “the time of a man’s life is ordered. No one
may shorten it at his will; no, nor any soldier quit the post at which
he has been set.”

“Say you so?” replied the other. “If all things have their appointed
end, who shall deny that the end which you shall yourself set is of the
things appointed by Fate? Remember also this: the longer the life the
more the sin, and the more the sin the greater the punishment. Once you
have missed the right way—and who has not missed it?—the further you
stray. And have you not strayed, Sir Knight? Bethink you what you have
endured, and what you have done amiss. What of the lady whom you swore
to champion and so shamefully deserted? What of the false Duessa to whom
you so basely pledged yourself? Does not the law say, ‘He that sins
shall die’? Die, therefore, as becomes a brave man, without delay, and
of your own accord.”

The Knight was greatly troubled by these words, for indeed there were
many things of which his conscience accused him, so that he trembled and
grew faint, which, when the Fiend perceived, he showed him a picture in
which was set forth the sufferings of lost souls; and, after this,
perceiving him to be yet more confounded, he brought to him a sword, and
poison, and a rope, bidding him choose the death by which he would
rather die. And when the Knight took none of these, he put into his hand
a sharp knife. Once and again did the Knight lift it up as if to strike;
but when the Lady Una saw it, she snatched the knife out of his hand,
crying, “Fie, fie on thee, faint hearted! Is this the battle which you
promised to fight against the dragon of the fiery mouth? Come away; let
not these idle words dismay your heart. You are chosen to a great work;
why should you despair? Surely Mercy rejoices against Judgment, and the
greater the need, the greater the grace. Come, let us leave this
accursed place.” Then the Knight rose up and departed. And when the
Fiend saw him depart, he took a halter and put it round his neck, and
was fain to hang himself. But this he could not do; many times had he
essayed the same, but had ever failed.

As they journeyed on the Lady Una perceived that her Knight, for all
that he was healed of his sickness, was feeble and faint, and unfit for
combat, if such should come in his way. Now she knew of an ancient house
of rest which was in those parts where he might have refreshment and
recover his strength. The hostess’ name was Cælia, which, being
interpreted, is Heavenly, and she had three daughters—Fidelia and
Speranza and Charissa, the last a matron with fair children, the others
maidens promised in marriage. There the Knight tarried many days. Much
discipline did he endure for the removing of his faults and weaknesses,
and much comfort also was ministered to him, and many things was he
taught. And when his heart had been thus strengthened and purified, then
did the Lady Cælia commend him to the care of a most venerable sire who
was chief among her ministers. The same showed him many fair and noble
sights, and last of all, on a mountain side, a way that was both steep
and long, and at the end of the way a fair city, whose walls were
builded high of pearls and all manner of precious stones. And as the
Knight gazed thereat, he saw angels ascending thereto and descending
therefrom. Then said he to his guide: “Tell me, sir, what city do I see
yonder?” “That,” answered he, “is the New Jerusalem which God has built
as a dwelling-place for his children.” “Verily,” said the Knight, “I
thought that Cleopolis, the abode of the great Gloriana, was the fairest
of all cities. But this does far excel it.” “Yea,” answered the holy
man, “that is true beyond all doubt; and yet this same Cleopolis is
worthy to be the abode of all true knights, and the service of Queen
Gloriana a most honourable thing. And you, fair sir, have chosen a good
part, rendering thus obedience to her command, and succouring on her
behalf this distressed lady. And I give you this counsel: When you have
won your great victory, and have hung your shield high among the shields
of the most famous knights of the world, then turn your thoughts to
better things; wash your hands clean from the stain of blood, for blood,
though it be shed in a righteous cause, must make a stain. So shall you
tread the steep and narrow path which leads to this fair city, the New
Jerusalem. There is a mansion prepared for you. Thus you shall be
numbered among the saints, and shall be the friend and patron of the
land which gave you birth, having for your style and title Saint George
of England.” Then said the Knight, “Dare I hope, being such as I am, to
attain to such a grace?” “Yea,” said the Sage, “others of the like
degree have so attained.” “But must I leave behind all the delights of
war and love?” “Be content,” answered the Sage; “in that joy are all
joys fulfilled.” “But,” said the Knight, “if this world is so vain a
thing, why should I turn to it again? May I not abide here in peace till
I can set forth on that last voyage?” “Nay,” said the Sage, “that may
not be. Thou must maintain this lady’s cause, and do the work that has
been committed to you. But now learn the secret of your birth. You are
of the ancient race of British kings; but a fairy stole you from your
cradle, and laid you in a furrow. There a certain ploughman found you,
and, designing to bring you up to his own craft, called you George,
which is by interpretation, ‘worker of the earth.’”

So the Knight went back to Cælia’s abode not a little comforted and
encouraged.




                               CHAPTER X
                      OF THE SLAYING OF THE DRAGON


The time was now come when the Red-Cross Knight must perform the task
which he had taken in hand. He departed therefore from the House of
Rest; nor had he journeyed far when the Lady Una said to him: “See now
the brazen tower in which my father and mother are imprisoned for fear
of the dragon, and lo! there is the watchman on the wall waiting for
good tidings.” Scarcely had she spoken when they heard a dreadful sound
of roaring, and, looking, they saw the dragon lying on the sunny side of
a hill, and he was like a hill himself, so great he was. Nor did he fail
to note the glitter of arms, for he was a watchful beast, and made all
haste to meet his enemy.

Then said the Knight to Una: “The hour is come; stand aside on yonder
hill where you may watch the battle and be safe yourself.”

Meanwhile the dragon came on, half flying and half on foot, such haste
did he make. Never was seen upon the earth so terrible a beast. He
looked like to a mountain as he came, so much of the earth did he cover,
so high did he rear himself in air, so broad a shadow did he cast. He
was covered all over with scales as of brass or iron, fitting so close
together that neither edge of sword nor point of spear could pierce
them. On either side he spread out two great wings like to the sails of
some tall ship. Behind was a great tail, wound in a hundred folds and
covering full three furlongs. Huge knots it had, each like to a shield,
and at the end were two great stings, armed each with deadliest poison.
But more cruel even than the stings were his claws, so mighty were they
and so sharp to rend asunder all that they should touch; and yet more
cruel than his claws was his monstrous head, with rows of teeth, strong
as iron, set in either jaw, while out of his throat came forth a smoking
breath with sulphurous stench. Deep set in his head were his two great
eyes, large as shields and burning with wrath as with fire, like to two
broad beacons set upon a hill to give warning of the foe’s approach to
all the shires around.

Such was the dragon to behold, and as he came on he might be seen to
rear his neck as in pride, while his scales bristled with anger—a
dreadful sight, which made even the Knight’s bold heart grow cold for a
space with fear. But not the less boldly did he address himself to the
fight. Laying his spear in rest he charged with all his might. Full on
the monster’s carcase struck the spear, but could not pierce those
scales, so stout and closely set they were. Only so shrewd was the blow
that the dragon felt the shock within: never had such been dealt to him
before, though he had met many a gallant knight in combat. So he spread
wide his wings, and, lifting himself in air, circled round till,
swooping down, he seized Knight and steed with his claws and lifted them
from the earth. For a whole bow-shot’s length he carried them, but then
was constrained to loose them, so fierce the struggle which they made.
So you may see a hawk, when he has pounced upon some bird that is too
heavy for his flight, carry his prey awhile, but is then constrained to
drop him from his claws. Again did the Knight, so restored to the earth,
charge his foe. Again did the spear glance aside, though there was the
force as of three men in the blow. Yet was not the thrust all in vain.
So fierce was the shock that the dragon was constrained to raise his
wing, and there, where the flesh was bare of shelter, the spear point
made a grisly wound. The beast caught the spear shaft with his claws and
brake it short, but the head stuck fast, while the blood poured out
amain. Then, in his rage, he vomited forth great flames of fire, and,
bending round his tail, caught the Knight’s horse by the legs, and he,
fiercely struggling to free himself, threw his rider to the ground. Ill
content with this fall, for it seemed as a dishonour to him, he snatched
his sword—of his spear he had been bereft—and smote the dragon on his
crest. The crest did not yield to the blow, so stoutly was it cased
about, but the creature felt the shock through all his mighty frame. Yet
again the Knight smote him, and once more the sword glanced aside as if
from a rock of adamant, yet was not the labour spent in vain, for now
the beast, seeking to avoid his enemy, would have raised himself in air,
but that the wounded wing could not perform its office. Then, in his
fury, he brayed aloud, and vomited forth from his throat so fierce a
flame that it scorched the face of the Knight, and set his beard on
fire, and seared his flesh through his armour. Grievous was the pain,
and scarcely to be borne, not less than that which Hercules of old
endured when the fiery robe steeped in the Centaur’s blood wrapped him
round.[1] He stood astonished and helpless. And when the dragon saw how
he fared he dealt him a great blow with his tail, and so brought him
headlong to the ground. Then, indeed, it had gone ill with him, but for
the happy chance that behind him there was a spring which sent forth a
stream of water, silvery bright and of great virtue for the healing of
all wounds and sicknesses. Men in the old time, before the dragon had
wasted the land, called it the Well of Life, and though it was now for
the most part forgotten, yet had it not lost its healing powers. It
could restore him that was wasted with sickness, ay, and raise the dead.
There was no spring on earth that could be matched with it. But of this
the dragon was unaware—how should he know of such things?—only when he
saw his adversary fall headlong into the water he clapped his wings for
joy. This the Lady Una saw from the hill whereon she sat watching the
fight. Sorely did it dismay her. Nevertheless she did not wholly lose
her hope, but prayed all night to God that it might yet be well with the
Knight.

When the next morning dawned in the sky she looked, and lo! her champion
stood all refreshed and ready for the fray. Nor did the dragon draw back
from the encounter. Straightway the Knight, lifting high his sword,
dealt a great blow at the monster’s crest, and this time, whether the
sacred spring had given a keener edge to the steel or had put new
strength into the arm which wielded it, it did that which never steel
had done before, for it made a great yawning wound. Then the dragon,
wrought to fury by the pain, lifted his tail high over his head, and
brought down upon his adversary the deadly double sting which lay in the
end. Through the shield it made its way, and fixed itself in his
shoulder. Grievous was the smart, but the Knight, thinking only of
victory and honour, did not flinch beneath it, but, gathering all his
strength, shore off the furthest joints of the tail, so that not the
half of it was left. But not yet was the battle won. For now the dragon
laid his two mighty claws upon the Knight, seizing his foot with one and
his shield with the other. Sorely was he now beset, for though with a
blow of his sword he rid himself of the one claw, the other held him
fast. At the same time there burst forth from the monsters mouth such
blasts of fire, such clouds of smoke, that he was constrained to retire
a little backward, and so, retiring, he slipped in the mire and fell.
Yet the matter turned to his good, for the same Spring of Life refreshed
and healed him as before, nor did the dragon dare to come near, for he
could not have aught to do with a thing so pure and holy. And so the
second day came to its ending.

This night also did the Lady Una pray for her Knight throughout the
hours of darkness, and the morning found her watching as before. But
with the third day came a speedy end to that fierce encounter. The
dragon, full of rage to be so baulked of his prey, ran at the Knight
with mouth wide open as if to swallow him alive. And he was not slow to
seize the occasion, for his foe had laid bare before him its most vital
part. Right into the monster’s mouth he drove his sword with all the
strength that was in him. Nor had he need to strike again, for the
monster fell as falls some cliff which the waves of the sea for many
years have worn away. High and strong it seems to stand, but it falls
far and wide in sudden ruin.

There is no need to tell in many words how the king and queen of that
land came forth from their prison with great gladness, and how the
people of the land rejoiced to be rid of so foul a tyranny, and how the
Lady Una seemed to be fairer than ever when she came forth in her robe
of state, and how the Knight and she were duly betrothed. “Fain would I
stay,” said the Knight, “but I am under promise to Queen Gloriana to
serve her for six years against the infidel.” “So be it,” said the king
of the land, “go, keep your promise as becomes a noble knight, and know
that when you shall return you shall have my daughter to wife and my
kingdom also, for this I have ever purposed in my heart, that he who
should deliver it from the foul tyranny should have it for his own, for
none could be more fit.”




                               CHAPTER XI
                    OF SIR GUYON AND THE LADY MEDINA


Archimage did not suffer long from his overthrow by Sansloy, for he had
devices at his command by which he could recover himself from all
sicknesses, howsoever sore they might be. And, being recovered, he set
himself to do some hurt to the Red-Cross Knight, who, by this time, had
bidden farewell to the Lady Una, and was journeying to render service to
Queen Gloriana.

As he was travelling with this purpose in his heart, he came upon a very
noble knight, clad in armour from top to toe, who was riding slowly
along the road, reigning back his horse’s pace to suit the steps of a
venerable pilgrim, who journeyed by his side. Archimage laid his hand
upon the neck of the knight’s horse and said: “Sir Knight, I pray you to
help one who is sadly in need of succour for himself and for another, of
whom he is in charge.” And while he spoke he made great pretence of fear
and trouble, trembling and weeping.

“Speak on,” answered Sir Guyon, for this was the knight’s name. “Speak
on, and I will not fail to help you, and the other of whom you speak.”

“Oh, sir,” said Archimage, “I am a squire, and I have a lady in charge
to deliver her to her parents, but there is a certain evil-minded Knight
who hinders me. I know not what I shall do, and she goes in deadly fear
that some great harm will happen to her.”

“And where is the lady?” asked Sir Guyon.

“Come, sir,” the false squire made answer, “and I will bring you to
her.” So the two went together, and found a lady sitting under a tree,
weeping sore, with her garments all dishevelled and torn.

“Fair lady,” said Sir Guyon, “it troubles me much to see you in this
plight. But take heart; I will surely call him who has done you any
wrong to strict account. But let me hear your complaint.”

So she told him her tale. And when she had ended he said: “But who is
this man; by what name or by what signs shall I know him?”

“His name,” said she, “I know not; but this I know, that he rode upon a
steed of dappled grey, and that he carried a shield of silver with a red
cross upon it.”

“Now by my head,” cried Sir Guyon, “I know this same Knight, and I
wonder such that he should have behaved so ill. He is a good Knight and
a true, and, I hear, has won great renown in the cause of a fair lady. I
was myself present in the Queen’s court when he took this task upon
himself, which he has now performed with great honour. Nevertheless, I
will try him in this matter, and he must needs either show that he is
free from blame, or make due amends.”

Now she that made all this show of grief was the false Duessa, and
Archimage had found her wandering in miserable plight after Prince
Arthur had dealt with her as has been told above. And having found her,
he decked her out with robes and ornaments, and made her to appear
passing fair, such arts he had. This he did because she helped him much
when he would tempt a knight into evil ways.

“And now, squire,” said Sir Guyon, “can you lead me to the place where
the Knight of whom you make this complaint may be found?”

“That can I,” said Archimage; and he led him to a shady valley hard by,
in the midst of which was a stream both clear and cold, and on the bank
of the stream sat a knight with his helmet unlaced, who drank of the
water as one who was resting after a long journey. “Sir,” said
Archimage, “yonder is the evil Knight; he would fain hide himself from
the punishment of his deeds.”

Then Sir Guyon addressed himself to the fight, and the Red-Cross Knight
likewise. But ere they encountered each other they stayed their hands:
“Pardon me, fair sir, that I had well-nigh set my spear against the
sacred badge which you bear upon your shield.”

“And I, too,” answered the Red-Cross Knight, “would likewise crave
pardon for like violence to that fair image of a maiden which is your
device.”

Then they held converse together. Sir Guyon told his tale, but when he
had ended it he looked, and lo! the false squire, the deceiver
Archimage, had fled, knowing that his device had come to naught. And now
the pilgrim that bore Sir Guyon company came up, and when he saw the
Red-Cross Knight, he said: “Fair son, God give you praise and peace for
ever. You indeed have won your place; but ours is yet to win.”

“His be the praise,” answered the Red-Cross Knight, “by whose grace I am
what I am.” So they parted with much courtesy, going each his several
way.

After a while they came to a fair castle by the sea where the Lady
Medina had her dwelling, Sir Guyon toiling painfully on foot, because,
when he was helping an unhappy traveller, a knave had stolen away his
horse. This Lady Medina was one of three sisters, and of the three
Elissa was the eldest and Perissa the youngest. These two were always at
variance, not a little with Medina, but still more with each other, and
she being always of an equal mind, and wise conduct, had the chief
authority in the place, though, indeed, their father had left it to the
three in equal shares. Elissa had for lover a certain Sir Hudibras, a
famous knight, but in deeds scarce equal to his high repute. He had a
most mighty body and sturdy limbs, but his wit was small. Perissa’s
knight was Sansloy, of whom mention has already been made. Never was man
more reckless, indeed, more careless of right and wrong. So soon as
these two heard that a stranger knight was come to the castle, then they
issued forth to fight with him, their ladies following; yet such was
their folly that even on the way they fell out and joined in deadly
fray, to the great disturbance of the house. Much did Sir Guyon marvel
as, entering the hall, he saw the fray.

“This,” said he to himself, “must have an end,” and, carrying his shield
on his left arm and with his right hand unsheathing his sword, he ran in
between the two. They with one consent turned their arms against him,
just as a bear and tiger in the desert plains of Africa, when some
traveller comes in sight, leave their strife and fall upon him with one
mind. It was a strange fight indeed, and Sir Guyon had fared ill, but
for his surpassing strength and courage, and even these might have
failed him in a conflict so unequal, but that the Lady Medina, hearing
in her bower of what had befallen, ran forth, with bare bosom and
dishevelled hair, and fell on her knees and besought them to abate their
strife: “Now, my lords!” she cried, “by the mothers that bare you, and
by the love that you have for your fair ladies, and by the knighthood to
which you owe your homage, I beseech you to put away this fury and to be
at peace among yourselves.” So she besought them, and though the two
sisters stood by, not helping a whit, but rather stirring up each her
champion to fiercer wrath, she prevailed. The knights let fall their
swords, and bowed their heads before her, and vowed to do her bidding.
Then she, fearing that their resolve might be unstable, bound them by a
treaty, which they, on their part, swore, on their knightly honour, that
they would keep for all time to come.

This done she bade them all, both knights and ladies, to a fair banquet.
And when they had had enough of meat and drink, she said: “Tell us, Sir
Knight, on what errand you are come and what end you seek.”

Then said Sir Guyon: “What you ask brings to my mind that great Queen,
fairest and best of all that are in the wide world. She is wont to make
a great feast on the first day of the New Year, to which come all
knights that seek adventure and desire to gain honour for themselves. At
this feast, at the beginning of the self-same year, I was present; and
it came to pass that this pilgrim whom you have bidden with me to your
feast, stood forth before the Queen, and made his complaint of a certain
wicked fairy that wasted the land wherein he dwelt, and wrought great
damage to its inhabitants. And when he had ended the Queen set this task
to me, unworthy as I am. Nor did I refuse to take it in hand. Now the
name of this wicked fairy is Acrasia. Three times has the moon waxed and
waned since that day, and I have already seen full proofs of the
mischief which she works. To subdue her, therefore, and to bring her
captive into the presence of Queen Gloriana is the purpose which I set
before myself.”

Then, the night being now far spent, all the guests betook themselves to
sleep.




                              CHAPTER XII
                  HOW SIR GUYON CAME INTO GREAT PERIL


Many perils did Sir Guyon encounter, which it would take too long time
to tell. Nor were there perils only of battle, such as befell in the
meeting of pagan knights and the like. For such he was well prepared;
never did sturdier champion lay spear in rest or wage war at close
quarters with his sword. Force could not overcome him, but he could be
led astray by fraud. So it was when, in his journeyings, he came to a
broad water, which seemed to bar his way. While he stood at the water’s
brink, wondering how he might win his way farther, suddenly there was
seen hard by a little boat rowed by a fair damsel. When he had told his
need she said: “Be content, fair sir; step you aboard and I will take
you to the place which you desire.”

So Sir Guyon, nothing doubting, stepped into the boat. But when he would
have taken his guide, the pilgrim, with him, he was denied. “Nay, nay,”
said the damsel, “we have not space for the old man on this journey.”
And even while she was speaking the boat was already far from the land,
for indeed it was a magic craft; nor could he even say farewell.

The two had pleasant converse awhile, for the damsel was gay and
debonair, and the knight courteous. Nevertheless, he somewhat misliked
her manner, and when in a short space they came to the other side of the
water, he perceived that he had been led astray, and was not a little
displeased. “Lady,” said he, “you have done me a wrong. This is not the
place which I sought; I did not think when I followed your bidding that
you would so deceive me.”

“Sir Knight,” she answered, “he that will travel by water cannot always
command his way; winds and waves will not answer to his call: the sea is
wide, and ’tis easy to go astray thereon. Yet here, methinks, you may
abide awhile in peace.”

So Sir Guyon stepped upon the shore, though he was but half-content to
find himself in such a plight. Nevertheless, he could not but perceive
that it was a right pleasant place to which he had come, for the ground
was covered with flowers, and the trees were green with the fresh leaves
of spring, and the sweet singing of birds was heard on every side. And
fairer and more pleasant than all else was the damsel of the boat;
nevertheless, Sir Guyon was ever on the watch, nor would he suffer
himself to be beguiled. “Maybe,” he said to himself, “this fair dame
designs to turn me from my quest. Why did she, as by design, part me
from my guide? Why did she turn me aside from the way in which I desired
to go? This was more, I doubt not, than an idle whim.” She, on the other
hand, perceived that she had failed of her intent, and was, in truth, as
willing that he should go as he was eager to depart. So after a while
she said: “Fair knight, I perceive that it irks you to abide in this
place. Suffer me, therefore, to carry you to the other shore.”

Well content, he stepped into the boat, and was ferried across in the
shortest space of time. So he passed through this peril, it seemed,
without hurt, save indeed that he had lost his guide, for the damsel in
her craft took him to a place far from where the guide had been left;
and this losing of the guide was, as will be seen, a very sore hurt
indeed.

After a while he came to a gloomy valley covered in on all sides from
the light of heaven with the thick branches of trees. And here, in the
deepest and darkest shade, he saw sitting a man of a most uncouth and
savage aspect, having his face all dark with smoke, and his eyes
bleared, and the hair of his head and his beard covered with soot. His
hands were black as the hands of one who works in a forge, and his nails
were like to claws. He had an iron coat, all rusty above, but underneath
of gold, and finely wrought with curious devices, though, indeed, it was
covered with dust and grime. In his lap he had a mass of golden coin,
which he counted, turning over each piece as if he would feed his eyes
with the delight of seeing them. Round about him were great heaps of
gold, some of them of rude ore, not yet smelted in the furnace, and some
smelted newly, in great squares and ingots, and others in round plates
without device; but for the most part they bore the devices of ancient
kings and Cæsars. When the man beheld Sir Guyon he rose as in great
fear, as if he would hide this precious store from a stranger’s eyes,
and began to pour it into a great hole that was thereby. But Sir Guyon,
leaping forward, caught him by the hand, and, though he was not a little
dismayed by the things which he saw, restrained him.

“Man,” he said, “if, indeed, man you are, why sit you here apart, hiding
these piles of wealth, and keeping them from being rightly used by men?”

“Truly,” answered the man, “you are bold and careless of yourself thus
to trouble me. Know that I am the god of this world, the greatest god
under heaven, Mammon by name. From me come riches and renown, powers and
honours, and all things which men covet upon earth. Know, then, that if
you will serve me, all these mountains of riches shall be yours; and if
these do not content you, I will give you tenfold more.”

“Mammon,” answered the knight, “in vain do you boast your godhead; in
vain do you offer me your gifts. Keep them for such as covet such idle
things, and look for a more fitting servant. I am of those who regard
honour and strive for kingdoms; fair shields and steeds gaily bedight
and shining arms are pleasant to my eyes.”

“Do you not perceive,” answered Mammon, “O foolish knight, that money
can furnish all these things in which you delight? Shields, and steeds,
and arms it can provide in the twinkling of an eye; ay, and crowns and
kingdoms also. I can throw down into the dust him that sits upon the
throne, and I can lift up to the throne him that lies in the dust.”

“But I,” said Sir Guyon, “have other thoughts of riches; that infinite
mischiefs spring from them—strife and debate and bloodshed. No crowns
nor kingdoms are yours, but you turn loyal truth to treason; you break
the sacred diadem in pieces, and rend the purple robe of kingship. It is
of you that castles are surprised, great cities sacked and burned, and
kingdoms overthrown!”

Then Mammon waxed wroth and cried: “Why, then, are men so eager to
obtain a thing so evil? Why do they so complain when they have it not,
and when they lose it, so upbraid?”

And when the knight answered these questions by telling of how in the
old time man was content without riches, and how he had been corrupted
by the lust of gold and silver, Mammon replied: “Nay, my son, let be
these stories of ancient days. You who live in these latter times must
be content to take your wage for the work you do. Come now, you shall
have what you will of these riches; and if you like them not, then you
are free to refuse. Only, if you refuse, blame me not afterwards.”

Then said the knight, for, being but mortal man, he was touched by the
sight of great riches: “I would not take aught that is offered me unless
I know that it has been rightly got. How can I be assured that you have
not taken these things unlawfully from the rightful owner?”

“Nay,” cried Mammon, “that is but idle talk. Never did eye behold these
things, never did hand handle them. I have kept them secret both from
heaven and from earth.”

“But,” said the knight, “what place is large enough to hold such store,
or safe enough to keep it from robbery?”

“Come and see,” answered Mammon. And the knight followed him, but he had
done more wisely to stay behind.

Mammon led him through the depths of the wood, till they came to a
secret way which was hollowed out in the earth. This they entered and
followed awhile, till they came to where it opened out into a wide
plain. Across the plain there was a broad highway which led to the
dwelling of Pluto. On either side of this road were dreadful shapes—Pain
holding an iron whip, and Strife with a bloody knife in his hand, and
Revenge, and Treason, and Jealousy. Fear, also, was there, ever
trembling, and seeking in vain where he might hide himself, and Sorrow,
crouching in darkness, and Shame, hiding her face from every eye. So
they came at last to a narrow door, which stood fast shut, with one
which was yawning wide open hard by. The narrow door was the door of
riches, and the wide the door of hell. This opened to Mammon of its own
accord; and Sir Guyon followed him, fearing nothing. But behind the
knight there followed close a monstrous fiend, watching him, that he
might do him to death if he should lay a covetous hand or cast a longing
eye on anything he might see; for such was the law of the place. The
walls and the floor and the roof were all gold, but covered with dust
and decay; and piled up on every side were huge chests of iron, bound
all of them with double bands, and on the floor were the bones of dead
men, who, in time past, had sought to win some spoil for themselves, and
so had come by their death. But not a word did Sir Guyon speak. So they
came to a great door of iron; this, too, opened to them as of its own
accord, and showed such a store of wealth as could not be seen in all
the world beside. Then Mammon turned to the knight and said: “See now
the happiness of the world; here is that for which men strive and
struggle. Lo! I lay before you all that you can desire.”

The knight answered: “I do refuse your proffered grace. I seek not to be
made happy in such fashion. I set before mine eyes another happiness. I
seek another end; I would spend my life in brave deeds. I desire rather
to be lord of them who have riches than to have them for myself.”

Mammon gnashed his teeth to hear such an answer, for he had thought that
the sight would overcome the soul of any mortal man, and that being so
overcome the knight would be his prey. But not yet did he give up all
hope. He led him into yet another chamber, in which were a hundred
furnaces all ablaze, and at every furnace strange creatures busy at
work. Some worked the bellows which raised the fire to white heat; and
some scummed off the dross from the molten gold, and some stirred it
with great ladles. But when they saw the shape of mortal man, they all
ceased from their work, and looked at him with wondering eyes. And he
was not a little dismayed to see them, so foul and hideous were they to
behold.

Then Mammon spoke again: “See now what mortal eye has never seen before.
You would know whence come the riches which men so fervently desire.
Look, here you see their source and origin. Here is the fountain of the
world’s whole wealth. Think, and change your mood, lest haply hereafter
you may wish and not be able to obtain.”

Said the knight, “Mammon, once more I refuse the thing which you offer.
I have all that I need; why should I ask for more? Suffer me to follow
my own way.”

Great was Mammon’s wrath to hear his offers so refused, but he would try
yet another temptation. He took the Knight into a very lofty, spacious
chamber in which was assembled a great company of people from every
nation under heaven. All of them were pressing forward with great uproar
to the chamber’s upper end, where, upon a dais, was set a lofty throne.
On the throne there sat a woman gorgeously attired, clad in such royal
robes as never were worn by earthly prince. Right fair of face was she
to behold, of such a beauty that she seemed, as it were, to make a
brightness in the chamber. But the beauty was not indeed her own. It was
but a pretence, cunningly devised to delude the hearts of men. In her
hand she held a great chain, of which the upper end was fastened to the
sky, and the lower went down into hell. All the crowd that thronged
about her sought to lay hold of this same chain, hoping thereby to climb
to some high estate. Some were fain to rise by the help of riches, and
some by flattery, and some by help of friendship, but all thought only
of themselves. And they that were high kept others down, and they that
were low would not suffer others to rise; every man was against his
fellow.

Then said Sir Guyon: “What means this that I see? What is this throng
that crowds about the lady’s throne? And the lady, who is she?”

Mammon answered: “That fair lady about whom these people crowd is my own
dear daughter. Her name is Philotime (which, being interpreted, is Love
of Honour). She is the fairest woman on the earth, could you but see her
in the upper air, for the darkness of the place hides her beauty. Her,
if you will, you shall have to wife, that she may advance you to high
dignity.”

“I thank you, sir,” said the knight, “for the honour which you design
for me. But I am only mortal man, and not fit match for an immortal
mate. And were it otherwise, my troth is given to another, and it would
ill become a loyal knight to break his faith.”

Again was Mammon greatly moved to wrath, but he hid it in his heart, and
led the knight into a garden full of herbs and trees, not such as earth
puts forth, in the upper air, to delight the souls of men: but such as
have about them the atmosphere of death. The cypress was there, and the
black ebony, and hemlock, which unjust Athens gave in old times to
Socrates, wisest of mortal men. These were gloomy to behold. But in the
midst was a tree, splendid with apples of gold. Hercules planted it with
the apples which he won from the garden of the daughters of Atlas, and
it bore fruits which were the occasions of strife, such as that which
Discord threw among the guests at the marriage-feast of Peleus and
Thetis. “For the Fairest!” was written on it. Hence came the strife of
the goddesses, and the Judgment of Paris, and the stealing of Helen, and
the bringing to the ground of the towers of Troy.

Much did the knight marvel to see the tree, for it spread its branches
far and wide across the garden, and even beyond the garden’s bounds; for
it was compassed about with a great mound. And the knight, desiring to
see all that could be seen of so strange a place, climbed upon the bank
and looked. And lo! there flowed below it a dark and dismal stream,
which men call the River of Wailing. In this he saw many miserable
creatures; and one he noted especially, who was always clutching at the
fruit which hung from the tree, and making as though he would drink from
the stream; and still the fruit seemed to draw back from his hand and
the water from his mouth. The knight, seeing him so tormented, asked him
who he was and how he came to be in such a plight.

“I am Tantalus,” answered the wretch, “the most miserable of all men; in
old time I feasted with the gods, and now I die of hunger and thirst.”

Looking a little further he saw one who sought to wash in the stream
hands covered with filth; but for all that he washed they were not one
whit the cleaner. And when the knight inquired of him who he might be,
he answered: “I am Pontius Pilate, most unjust of judges. I condemned
most unrighteously the Lord of Life to die, and washed my hands to show
that I was innocent of his blood, but in truth I was most guilty.”

Then Mammon, coming to him again, said: “Will you not even now take of
the good things which I offer you, for yet there is time?”

But Sir Guyon was aware of his guile, and would not. “Take me back,” he
said, “to the place from which I came,” and Mammon was constrained to
obey, for it was not permitted to him to keep the knight or any man
against his will. He led him back, therefore, to the upper air; but as
soon as Sir Guyon felt the wind blow upon his face, for want of food and
sleep he fell into a swoon, and lay without sense upon the ground.




                              CHAPTER XIII
                          OF TWO PAGAN KNIGHTS


While Sir Guyon was beholding the wonders of the house of Mammon, his
faithful guide, the pilgrim, was seeking him, and came by happy chance,
or leading of the powers above, to the place where he lay. Sore troubled
he was to see him in so sore a plight, for indeed he lay as one that was
dead. Nevertheless, feeling his pulse with trembling hand, the pilgrim
found that it still did beat. Thereat greatly rejoicing he tended him
with all care and kindness.

While he was busy with this tending, he lifted his eyes and saw two
knights riding towards him clad in bright armour and an old man pacing
by their side. The two were brothers, Pyrochles and Cymochles by name,
and the old man was Archimage. Well he knew who they were, for Sir Guyon
had done battle with the two in the time past, and had vanquished them,
nor did he doubt that the old man, for all his reverend looks, was a
wicked sorcerer. And they, too, knew who he was, and that the knight who
lay upon the ground was their whilom adversary, Sir Guyon. And first Sir
Pyrochles cried aloud: “Old man, leave that dead man to us. A traitor
and a coward he was, while he was yet alive; and now he lies
dishonoured!”

“Nay, Sir Knight,” answered the pilgrim, “you do wrong so to revile the
dead. He was a true knight and valiant in the field, as none know more
surely than yourself.”

Then said the other pagan, Cymochles: “Old man, you dote. And, indeed,
what know you of knighthood and valour? All is not gold that glitters;
nor are all good knights that know how to set spear in rest and use the
sword. Let a man be judged by his end. There he lies dead on the field,
and the dead are nothing worth.”

Pyrochles spoke again: “Ay, he is dead and I must forego the vengeance
that I vowed to have upon him. Nevertheless, what I can that will I
have. I will despoil him of his arms. Why should a dead body be arrayed
in so noble a fashion?”

“Nay, Sir Knight,” cried the pilgrim, “I pray you not to do so foul a
deed. ’Tis a vile thing to rob the dead. Surely it would better befit a
noble knight to leave these things to be the ornament of his tomb.”

“What tomb?” cried Pyrochles, in his rage; “the raven and the kite are
tomb enough for such as he.”

Thus speaking, he laid a rude hand upon Sir Guyon’s shield, and
Cymochles began to unlace his helmet. But while they were so busied,
they chanced to spy a knight of gallant mien and bravely accoutred,
riding towards them, with a squire behind him, who carried a spear of
ebony and a covered shield. And Archimage, so cunning was he, knew him
from afar, and he cried to the two brothers: “Rise, prepare yourselves
for battle. Here comes the sturdiest knight in all the world, Prince
Arthur. Many a pagan has he laid low in battle. You must use all your
skill to hold your own against him.”

So the two made themselves ready for battle. And now the strange knight
rode up, and with all courtesy made his salute to the company, to which
greeting the two brothers made but a churlish return. He said to the
pilgrim: “Tell me, reverend sir, what misfortune has befallen this
knight. Did he die in course of nature, or by treason, or in fair
fight?”

Said the pilgrim: “He is not dead, but in a swoon that has the likeness
of death.”

Then Prince Arthur, turning to the two brothers, said with all courtesy:
“Valiant sirs, who, I doubt not, have just complaint against this
knight, who lies here dead, or seeming dead upon the ground, will you
not abate your wrath awhile? I would not challenge your right, but would
rather entreat your pardon for this helpless body.”

“But who are you?” said Cymochles, “that make yourself his daysman? Who
are you that would hinder me from wreaking on his vile carcase the
vengeance which I should have required had he lived? The man is dead,
but his offence still lives.”

“It is but true,” said the Prince, “that evil lives after death, and
that the curse goes down even to the third and fourth generation, so
stern is the judgment of God. But yet the knight who raises his hand
against the dead, sins against his honour.”

But Pyrochles made reply: “Stranger, you make yourself a sharer in the
dead man’s crime.” And as he spoke, he lifted his great sword and dealt
a blow which, but that the Prince’s horse swerved aside, had surely laid
him on the earth. He reeled somewhat in the saddle, but so true was his
seat, still kept his place.

Great was his wrath at such treacherous attack. “Traitor,” he said, “you
have broken the law of arms, so to strike without challenge given, and
you shall suffer such penalty as befits.” So speaking, he thrust his
spear, and thought with that one thrust to end the battle. And so,
indeed, it would have fallen out, but for Sir Guyon’s shield, which the
pagan carried. Yet even through this, with its seven folds, did the
spear-head pass, and pierced Pyrochles’ shoulder, and drove him bleeding
to the earth.

When Cymochles saw what had happened, he leapt forward in great wrath,
crying: “Now, by Mahomet, cursed thief! You shall pay for this blow!”
and smote him on the crest so mightily that he had no chance but to
leave his saddle, else had his head been cleft in twain. Now was the
Prince in no small distress, for what could he do with his spear alone
against two stalwart knights? For sword he had none, and they too were
both fully armed, and well skilled in fight, unwounded one, and the
other wounded indeed, but only made thereby more furious. Bravely did he
bear himself, and bravely held his own, wounding now this adversary and
now that, yet did not himself escape without hurt, for Cymochles wounded
him sorely in the side, so that the blood flowed out amain. And when the
brothers saw it, they rejoiced greatly, thinking that the end had come.
But now the pilgrim, seeing that the Prince was hard bested, and all for
want of a sword, came near and put Sir Guyon’s blade into his hand,
saying, “My son, God bless your right hand; use the sword as he that
owns it would have used!”

Right glad was the knight to have this help, and advanced himself with
new courage to his task. He smote first this brother and then that, and
both so fiercely that, though they were two against one, they could not
hold their own, but began to give way. Only the Prince was at this
disadvantage that, when Pyrochles held out against him the shield of Sir
Guyon with the likeness of Queen Gloriana on it, his hand retreated and
forebore the stroke. Once and again was the pagan saved thereby from
instant doom. But for all that the appointed hour drew nigh. Cymochles,
thinking to end the battle, smote the Prince upon the hauberk. So fierce
was the blow, that it broke the links of the mail in twain, and made the
Prince to reel, as he had never reeled before. But his courage rose all
the higher, and his strength seemed to be doubled. High in the air he
lifted Sir Guyon’s sword, and smote the pagan’s helmet so fiercely that
he shore it in two, and the steel pierced to the brain, so that he fell
dying to the ground.

When Pyrochles beheld what had befallen his brother, he was so filled
with rage that he cast away all caution and care, and rushed in madman’s
fashion upon the Prince. And now might be seen how an evil deed finds
its recompense. The sword which the pagan carried was, in truth, the
Prince’s own, which had been filched from him by craft. Now Archimage
had warned the knight before, saying: “Use not this blade against its
rightful lord; it will not serve your will.” And well he knew that he
spoke the truth. But Pyrochles had laughed him to scorn, saying:

“You think too much, old man, of magic charms and words.”

Yet now he found that the old man’s words were true. So perceiving that
he smote to no purpose, he threw the sword down and leapt upon the
Prince, and caught him round the middle and thought to throw him to the
earth. But he strove to no purpose, for the Prince surpassed him both in
strength and in skill, so that he was thrown to the ground, whereon he
lay helpless as a bittern in the claws of an eagle. Full of rage he was,
but he did not move nor cast a look upon his conqueror. But the Prince,
full of courtesy and kindness, said: “Pagan, this is an evil day for
you; but if you will give up your false faith, and yield yourself to be
my liegeman for ever, I will give you life in reward for your courage,
and blot out from my memory all your misdeeds.”

“Fool,” cried the pagan in his rage, “I defy your gift; use your fortune
as you will, slay me, for I would not live at your behest.” And the
Prince, much against his will, smote him that he died.

And now Sir Guyon, waking from his swoon, saw the pilgrim at his side,
and cried out with joy, “Dear friend, for lack of whose guidance I have
wandered long, how gladly do I see you again. But where are my shield
and my sword?” Then the pilgrim told him what had befallen, and the
knight rendered his thanks to the Prince right courteously, and he as
courteously received them.




                              CHAPTER XIV
                            OF QUEEN ACRASIA


All day the two journeyed together with much sweet converse, and, when
it was evening, they came to a fair castle, of which the gate was fast
barred. So the Prince bade his squire wind his horn under the castle
wall, which thing he did with such a will, that a watchman straightway
looked forth from an upper storey; but the gate was barred as before.
“What want you, strangers?” he asked.

“We seek shelter for the night,” answered the squire.

“Fly,” cried the man, “fly, my friends, for your lives. Willingly would
I give you shelter, but this is no safe abiding place, so closely and
fiercely do our enemies assail us. Truly many knights, coming as you
have come this day, have perished miserably.” And while he was speaking
a thousand villainous creatures swarmed up from all the rocks and caves
about, armed in the strangest fashion, some with pikes, and some with
clubs, and some with stakes hardened in the fire. Fiercely they rushed
at the knights and their company, and for a while drove them back by
mere force of numbers. But soon they were forced to fly, and though they
came again and again, yet before the night fell they departed and left
the travellers in peace. And now the castle gate was opened wide, and
the lady of the place, Alma by name, coming to the door with a fair
company of knights and dames, bade them welcome. Then she showed them
her castle, which was marvellously well-ordered in all its parts. There
was a noble hall in which the guests—and there was already gathered a
goodly company of knights and ladies—were entertained; and a library
where there was a great store of goodly books, and all other things
which the heart of man could desire.

On the morrow, Sir Guyon and his guide set forth again, but Prince
Arthur tarried behind, desiring to help the Lady Alma against the
enemies who sought to take her castle. And this he did in such a fashion
that she was troubled no more with them. Yet of his great deeds I will
not further speak, being rather concerned with the doings of Sir Guyon,
who was indeed now come to the accomplishment of his task.

First they came to a great water, where there was a ferry-boat ready
prepared for their coming. In this they embarked and set forth, a stout
ferryman being at hand to manage the craft. Two days they sailed and saw
no land; but on the third day, as the light began to dawn in the East,
they heard the sound of a great roaring. Now the pilgrim held the tiller
and steered the craft. To him said the ferryman: “Pilgrim, steer an even
course; there is a dangerous place which we must pass across,—on the one
side is a great whirlpool, and a ship that comes too near it is sure to
sink, and on the other a great rock of magnet, which, if we keep not a
due distance, will draw us to itself. Steer then so that we may not fall
into this danger or into that.”

Right skilfully did the pilgrim steer, and great was the need. The
whirlpool, indeed, showed no sign of what had happened there before, for
all was swallowed up in its depths; but on the rock they saw the ribs of
ships which had been broken upon it, and the bones of men lying in its
clefts. And birds of prey, mews and cormorants and the like, sat
watching for such spoils as should come. Right willingly did they pass
from that place of death. And when the ferryman, plying his oars with
sturdy strength, had rowed awhile, Sir Guyon cried, pointing with his
hand: “I see land yonder; steer thereto, good sir.”

“Nay,” said the ferryman, “it is not so. That is no land which you see,
but what men call the Wandering Islands. Many men have come to their
deaths through them. They seem firm ground, fairly grown with trees and
grass and flowers; but let a man once set his foot upon them, he can
never recover it again.”

So they journeyed on in a straight course, and in so doing came to one
of these islands, whereon they espied a fair lady sitting. On the rock
she sat, and she had a little boat hard by. “Come hither, my friends,”
she said. “I have somewhat here which I would show you, and which you
would willingly see.”

But Sir Guyon said: “Nay, nay. We are otherwise minded; this is the Lady
of the Lake who caused me to be parted from my guide.” So they passed
on, and took no heed. But when, after a while, they passed hard by
another island, on which sat a maiden in sore distress, as it seemed,
Sir Guyon’s heart was moved; for was it not a good knight’s part to
succour ladies in distress? “Steer thither,” he cried.

“Not so. This damsel in distress is but a show; no damsel she, but some
ill creature ready to devour any that she may deceive.” So they passed
on, nor did they halt when, passing by a pleasant bay, they heard a
sound of sweet singing.

“O Guyon,” such was the song which they heard, “flower of chivalry, most
famous of all knights upon earth, turn thy bark hither, and rest
awhile.”

“Listen not,” said the pilgrim, “they do but seek to lure you to your
death.”

These things past, they came to the place for which they were bound. And
the pilgrim said: “This, Sir Knight, is the place where you must contend
for the mastery. Take your arms, and make yourself ready, for the hour
of trial is at hand.”

And now the ferryman drove the boat upon the shore, and Sir Guyon and
his guide stepped out upon the sand. Straightway they heard a hideous
bellowing as of savage beasts, and soon the beasts themselves came in
view, threatening as if they would devour them. But no sooner did the
pilgrim hold out his staff than they ceased their roaring, and humbled
themselves to the ground. And now they came to the Bower of Bliss, a
place most daintily adorned with all that could please the eye. The
porch by which they entered was of ivory cunningly adorned with carved
work, in which was told the story of Jason and Medea; how he sailed in
the good ship _Argo_, and how he won the love of the king’s daughter,
and how she helped him to win the fleece of gold from the dragon which
guarded it, and how she fled with him over the sea. And when they had
passed through the porch they came to a very fair meadow, adorned with
the fairest trees and flowers. And the meadow being passed they came to
another gate, where there sat a comely damsel, who pressed the clusters
of a vine which hung above her head into a cup. This cup she proffered
to the knight, and he, suspecting evil in all that seemed most fair and
pleasant, took it from her hand, and threw it violently on the ground,
so that it was broken into many pieces, and all the liquor was spilt.

[Illustration: Sir Guyon and the Men in Bestial Shapes.]

Many other tempting sights did they see, and all the knight passed by
unscathed, the pilgrim not ceasing on occasion to give counsel and
warning. So at last they came to the most sacred place of the Bower,
where the queen herself, Acrasia by name, had her abode. Fair she was
beyond all words and daintily arrayed, and at her feet there lay a
goodly knight asleep. He was of goodly aspect, just come to the years of
manhood, with the down newly sprung upon his cheeks and his lips. His
arms hung idly on a tree hard by, but his shield was without an emblem,
as if he had put away the purpose of his life.

Sir Guyon and the pilgrim drew near, none seeming to heed them, so
occupied were they with the pleasures of the place. And then the pilgrim
threw over the queen and the knight a net which he had cunningly
prepared for that same purpose. Fast did it hold them for all their
struggles, neither force nor art could avail them, though they strove
with all their might. The queen being thus captured, they bound her with
chains of adamant, for nothing else could hold her safely; but the
knight they soon set free, for he was of a noble nature, though it was
much decayed by evil ways, and he was willing to take to himself good
advice and counsel. And the beauty and glory of the Bower did they
deface and spoil, the goodly carvings they broke in pieces, and cut down
the pleasant groves. As for the beasts, when the pilgrim raised his
staff over them, they left their bestial shapes and came back to their
own, for, indeed, they were men whom this same evil queen had changed to
the forms and thoughts of beasts. So did Sir Guyon perform the command
of Queen Gloriana.




                               CHAPTER XV
                               BRITOMART


Sir Guyon returned to rest awhile in the castle of the Lady Alma, where
also he had Prince Arthur for companion. Acrasia he sent to Queen
Gloriana under a strong guard, lest perchance her friends and followers,
of whom there was great multitude, should seek to deliver her. After a
while the two knights set out again on their journey. Many good deeds
they did, helping the weak and setting right the things that were wrong.
It happened on a certain day that they espied a knight riding towards
them, with an aged squire by his side, who seemed too weak for the
burden which he bare. The knight had a shield with the device of a lion
on a field of gold. Sir Guyon said to Prince Arthur, “Let me, I pray
you, have this turn.”

So he put his spear to rest, and charged, and the stranger did likewise.
They met full and fair; Sir Guyon’s spear, so fast and furious was the
onset, was like to pierce the stranger’s shield, but this it did not
avail to do, nor did it drive the stranger from his seat: nevertheless
he was somewhat shaken. On the other hand, Sir Guyon himself was carried
back, ere he was aware, nigh upon a spear’s length behind the crupper of
his saddle, yet without hurt to life or limb. Nevertheless his anger was
great, for never since the day when he first bore arms as a knight had
he been dismounted in such fashion. And indeed, if he had known the
whole truth of the matter, his anger had been both less and greater;
less because the spear by which he had been overthrown was of the magic
sort, and greater, because the knight by whom he had been overthrown was
no man, but a maid, even the famous Britomart. Full of rage he was and
hot to do away his disgrace, as leaping from the ground he drew his
sword. And now the pilgrim in great haste came between the knight and
his purpose, for being a holy man and wise, he perceived that there was
some marvellous power in that same spear-point. This indeed he did not
disclose, for it was not lawful so to do, but he made other pretence:
“Nay, Sir Knight, it were ill advised to seek amends with your sword for
the mischance of your spear. If haply your steed swerved somewhat to the
side, or your page was somewhat careless in the ordering of your
equipage, why should you be so carried away by wrath; for, remember, you
have no quarrel with this knight.”

With such prudent counsels did the pilgrim pacify Sir Guyon’s wrath.
Thus concord was made between the two, in which the prince also was
joined.

When they had journeyed awhile Prince Arthur and Sir Guyon set off on an
adventure of their own, to rescue some fair lady in distress. But
Britomart, finding that they two would suffice for that enterprise, on
which her own mind was in nowise set, rode on without company until she
came to a fair castle, with a meadow before the gate, on which she saw
six knights setting upon one. He was not a little pressed by such odds,
yet in nowise dismayed. Indeed, the six dared not to stand up against
him face to face, so shrewd were the blows which he dealt them, but
sought to take him at a disadvantage from behind. Britomart endured not
to see such knavish work, but setting spurs to her horse and crying
aloud, “Have done with such foul tricks,” made all haste to help. And
when they ceased awhile from the attack, she said to the single knight:
“How comes it, sir, that you do battle in such fashion and at such
odds?”

“Sir,” he made answer, “these six would have me swear that the lady of
this castle hard by is fairer than the lady whom I love. Now that I
utterly refuse; I had sooner die than break my plighted word in such a
fashion.”

Then said one of the six, speaking for his fellows: “In this castle
which you see there dwells a lady of such a beauty that none in all the
world can be compared with her. She has ordained this law, that any
knight coming to this place, if he have no lady-love already, shall vow
himself to her service; but if he have such a lady-love, then he shall
confess that she is of less grace and beauty, or failing so to do, shall
do battle with us.”

“By heaven!” cried Britomart, “this is a hard choice! And tell me, pray,
if this knight be obedient to this same law, what reward shall he have?”

“He shall have the lady’s fair regard. But tell us, sir, for
yourself—have you a lady-love?”

“That,” said Britomart, “I answer not; whether I have such or have not,
I pay no such homage as you ask to your lady. Rather, I take up this
good knight’s cause against you.” And even while she spoke, she rode at
one of the six and laid him low upon the ground, and then at another,
and then again at a third, with the like end. Meanwhile the knight had
discomfited the fourth. And the two that were left were fain to sue for
peace. “See,” said Britomart, “how truth and honour prevail!”

Then was Britomart taken into the castle and received with great honour.
Yet she misliked the place and the company, for that they both seemed
unduly given over to ease and luxury. Nor would she doff her armour,
nor, indeed, do aught but raise the visor of her helmet. And when the
lady of the place, seeing that the stranger was very fair and of a noble
presence, bore herself as one greatly enamoured, she departed in great
discontent. The six knights would fain have stopped her going, and one
of them, Gardanté by name, shooting with an arrow, for to come to closer
quarters was not to his mind, wounded her in the side. But he and his
companions received manifold more hurt than they gave, not only from
Britomart, but from the strange knight and Sir Guyon also, for they,
hearing the tumult, came to her help.

As they journeyed, it came into Sir Guyon’s mind to inquire of his
companion concerning her condition, and how she came to be wandering in
these parts. Britomart was not a little disturbed by this questioning.
For a while she was silent, and could make no answer, but trembled and
blushed, no knight but a very woman. But when the passion had passed,
and she had gathered her strength together, she said: “Sir Knight, I
would have you know that from a child I have been trained in things of
war, to carry a shield, and to put spear in rest, that the life of ease,
which women, for the most part, follow, pleased me not; and as for
fingering the fine needle and the slender thread, by heaven! I had
sooner be struck dead by a foeman’s spear! And so, all my heart being
set on deeds of arms and perilous adventures, by sea and by land,
wheresoever they might be met, I came from my own country, which men
call the Greater Britain, into this land. For it was told me that in
this same fairy land many such adventures were to be found, and much
glory and honour won thereupon. And now, courteous sir, I would ask you
one question: Know you, perchance, of one Artegall, for he has done me a
wrong for which I would fain requite him?”

Scarcely had she spoken the words, when she fain would have called them
back. But Sir Guyon, taking them up with no small heat, made answer:
“Fair warrior, surely you do ill to accuse so true and loyal a knight as
is Sir Artegall with ill-behaviour. Truly of all who have ever taken
part in tilt or tourney, there is not one that stands in better repute
than he. It were indeed the greatest of marvels that he should do an
unworthy act, or even think in his heart an unworthy thought. And if you
have come with such a purpose in your heart, then I say that you have
journeyed far on a false errand.”

Now Britomart, in her secret heart, was glad to hear such praises of Sir
Artegall. For, indeed, as will be seen, she loved him, and it was her
woman’s craft, by speaking ill of him to his friends, so to call forth
his praises. And when, with this thought in her heart, she had again
uttered some injurious words concerning him, Sir Guyon answered: “It
would be well, lady, that you should listen to reason in this matter.
Truly he is not one whom you can compel by force to do this thing or
that, for there is not, I take it, a knight upon earth that can match
him in equal fight. And, indeed, for what you ask me, where is Sir
Artegall to be found, I cannot tell you. He is not one who will remain
for long time in any certain place; rather he wanders round the world,
seeking occasion for great deeds, by which he can help to right such as
suffer wrong.”

Britomart was greatly pleased to hear such praises of the knight. Still
she dissembled the matter and said: “Whether it be easy or hard to find
the man I know not; but at least I would know how I may profitably seek
him. Tell me some mark by which I may know him, the manner of his
shield, the fashion of his arms, the bearing of his steed, and other
things by which I may certainly know the man should I chance to
encounter him.” Then Sir Guyon told her all that she would know, and
she, listening to all that he said, found it most welcome to her heart.




                              CHAPTER XVI
                        OF MERLIN’S MAGIC MIRROR


There was a certain king of old time in the land of Deheubarth, which
men now call South Wales. His name was Ryence, and he had for his
principal counsellor one Merlin, who was a great magician. This Merlin
made by his art a wonderful mirror, which was so contrived that he who
looked in it could see anything from the lowest parts of the earth to
the highest part of the heavens, if only it concerned him. If a foe
contrived any evil against him, if a friend had used any falsehood in
respect of him, there he could see it plainly set forth. This mirror
Merlin gave to the king for a protection, that if at any time an enemy
should invade his dominions, he should know of his design before tidings
could come to him from without, and so should be able to be beforehand
with him. Never had prince a more noble present, nor one more worthy of
reward, for there could be no treason within the realm or enmity without
but that it came straightway to the king’s knowledge.

Now Britomart was the daughter of King Ryence, and it chanced on a
certain day that she came into his closet, for he kept nothing secret
from her, seeing that she was his only child and the heir of his
kingdom, and there saw Merlin’s mirror. She had seen it indeed not once
or twice only, and knew its virtues. There came into her head the
thought that she might see therein the image of the man who should be
her husband. Such a thought maidens are wont to entertain, and
Britomart, being her father’s only child, and knowing that she would one
day come to the kingdom, was the more curious in this regard, nor had
she had to that time any thought of one man more than of another. So
looking into the mirror she saw a very comely knight, armed cap-à-pie.
He had the visor of his helmet up, showing a face that would strike fear
into an enemy and be loving to a friend. He was tall of stature, and
bore himself with a manly grace. For his crest he had a hound couchant,
and his armour seemed of ancient fashion, massive and strong to look at;
on it was written in old letters these words, “The Arms of Achilles
which Artegall did win.” The shield was of seven folds, and it bore an
ermilin crowned, white on a field of blue. The maiden looked and liked
well what she saw, and went her way, not knowing—such was the simplicity
of her age—that she had seen with her eyes the fate that should rule the
fortunes of her life. That keen archer Love had wounded her with his
arrow, but she knew it not. Yet from that day she began to droop. No
longer did she carry herself with princely pride. Sad and solemn was
she, and full of fancies, yet knew not why. That she ailed somewhat she
was well aware, but thought it was not love, but some passing mood of
melancholy. Such was she by day, and at night, when she laid herself
down to rest, sleep fled far from her eyes. She kept a sorrowful watch
as the hours of the night went by, and she watered her couch with her
tears; and if, when nature was worn out with these long watchings, she
fell into some brief slumber, then some fearful dreams would come and
bring with them a worse unrest.

One night her nurse, Glaucé by name, caught her in her arms as she was
leaping from her bed, and held her down by force. “Ah, my child,” she
cried, “how is it that you are in this evil plight? What is it that has
changed your cheerful mood to this sadness? Surely there is some cause
for these troubles that haunt you by night, and drive away sleep from
your eyes. And in the days when your equals in age disport themselves,
you mope in solitary corners, and have no enjoyment of your princely
life. I doubt much whether the cause be not love; yet if the love be
worthy of your race and royal birth—and that it is I seem to myself to
read by many signs and tokens—then I do swear most solemnly to help you.
Away, dear child, with your fears! Neither danger or death shall keep me
from bringing you due relief.” Then she caught the maid in her arms, and
embraced her in all tenderness, and chafed her limbs to drive away the
cold, and kissed her eyes, still entreating that she should show the
secret of her heart. For a while the maid was silent; then she said,
“Dear nurse, why should you grieve for me? Is it not enough that I must
die? Must you die also?”

“Talk not of dying,” cried the nurse; “never was wound yet for which no
salve could be found. The god who has wounded you has, I doubt not, in
his quiver another arrow for your lover’s heart.”

So they talked together; the maid would have it that there was no remedy
for her trouble; the old nurse still steadfastly affirmed that the cure
could easily be found. At last the damsel told the secret of her grief,
as it seemed to her: “Alas, dear mother,” she said, “it is no living man
whose image dwells in my heart and makes this pain; it is but the shadow
and semblance of a knight; I saw him one day in the magic mirror of the
king my father; this is the baited hook which, as some foolish fish, I
swallowed; it is this thought that brings me to my death.”

“Is this all, my daughter?” cried the nurse; “then is nothing strange or
against nature here. Why should you not set your heart on one who seemed
so worthy of your love?”

“Oh, mother,” answered the girl, “I seemed to myself like the Greek boy
of old who saw his own face in the fountain and perished miserably.”

“Nay,” cried the nurse, “he was but the lover of a shadow, and rightly
faded into a flower. But of this image which you saw, there is, be sure,
a substance somewhere, and there are arts by which it may be found. And
now, dear child, let me give you my counsel. If you can banish this
thought from your mind till the convenient time be come, then do so. If
it is too strong for you, then I vow and promise that, by one means or
another, I will find this very knight whose image you beheld.”

The maid was somewhat encouraged by these words, and slept awhile. But
on the morrow, and as the days went by, the old trouble came again, and
Glaucé, seeing that neither words nor prayers, nor strange spells of the
magic art, for such she tried, were of any avail, judged that some other
remedy must needs be found. What this remedy might be she long doubted
in herself. At last it seemed to her that he who had made the mirror,
that is to say, the wise magician Merlin, might tell her in what land
the knight of the image might dwell, for though he dwelt in farthest
Ind, yet find him she would. Forthwith these two, that is to say, Glaucé
and the maiden Britomart, disguised themselves in mean attire, that no
one might learn their purpose, and betook themselves to Maridunum,
where, in a cave which he had hollowed out for himself beneath the
earth, so as to escape from the curious eyes of men, Merlin had his
abode. When they were come to the place they stood awhile without, in
doubt and fear, whether they had done well in making so bold a venture.

At last the maid, moved by love, which is ever bold, led the way, and
Glaucé following, they stood within the cave. There they found the
magician busy on some wonderful work, for he was writing strange
characters on the ground, the spells by which he bound the spirits of
the earth to his service. He was not one whit moved at their coming, of
which, indeed, he was aware beforehand, for indeed by his art he knew
the secret thoughts of others. Nevertheless he made as though he knew
not their errand, saying: “Tell me now on what business you are come?”

Then Glaucé answered: “Blame us not, kind sir, that we have thus
disturbed you in your solitude, coming thus unbidden, but the need was
great.”

“Speak on,” said Merlin.

Then she began: “Three months have passed since this maiden here began
to sicken of some strange disease. What it is, and whence it began, I
know not; only this I know, that unless you can find some remedy she
must shortly die.”

The magician smiled at her woman’s craft, knowing well that she had in
her heart that which she would not tell. “Madam,” he said, “I take it
from what you say that this damsel has more need of the physician’s art
than of any skill of mine. They who may find a remedy for their trouble
elsewhere, do ill to have recourse to the magic art.”

The old dame was not a little disturbed by these words, but yet was
loath to show her true purpose. “Sir,” she said, “the trouble has taken
too strong a hold on this maiden’s life that the physician’s art could
work a cure. I fear me much that some bad spell has been cast upon her.
Some witch or evil spirit has done this thing; therefore it is that we
seek your help.”

When he heard these words Merlin could no more contain himself, but
laughed aloud. “Glaucé,” he said, “what avails this pretence by which
you seek to hide your purpose? And you, fair Britomart, why have you
thus disguised yourself in mean attire, as the sun hides himself behind
a cloud? You have come, by the ordering of Fate, to the very place where
you shall find the help which you need.” The maiden, hearing her name so
called, blushed a rosy red; but the nurse, not one whit dismayed, but
rather taking heart at Merlin’s words, said:

“Sir, if you know our troubles, and, indeed, what is there that you do
not know, have pity upon us, and help us in our need.”

Merlin sat silent awhile, for many thoughts were in his mind. At last he
spoke: “Most noble maid, who have learned to love in this strange
fashion, be not dismayed by this hard beginning of your life. It was no
chance look, O Britomart, in the mirror of the king your father, but the
unchanging course of the purposes of Heaven, that showed you this image.
Believe me, it is no ill-fortune that you love this noble knight. Submit
yourself, therefore, to the purposes of God, and be content to do His
will.”

Then said Glaucé: “Tell us, man of wisdom, what means she shall use,
what ways she shall take, to find this man. Or has she no need of toil,
but may sit still while her fate is fashioned for her?”

“The fates,” answered Merlin, “are firmly fixed; not the less it becomes
those whom they concern to do their own endeavour, and to be
fellow-workers with God.” Then he told Britomart the true name and
lineage of Sir Artegall, how that he was son to Gorloïs, King of
Cornwall in time past, and brother to Cador, then king of the same land.
Then he turned to Britomart and opened to her the future, how she should
be wife to Sir Artegall, and how from them would come a line of kings
who should reign with great glory. Many things that should come to pass
in after days, both good and evil, did Merlin unfold to her.




                              CHAPTER XVII
                       HOW BRITOMART TOOK TO ARMS


From Merlin’s cave these two, Britomart and Glaucé, her nurse, went back
to their own home. There they consulted together many days how they
might best carry out their purpose of seeking Sir Artegall. At last
Glaucé said: “My daughter, I have conceived in my heart a scheme,
somewhat bold, I must confess, yet such as may be accomplished if you
are both brave and prudent. And above all things, it is in good accord
with the conditions of these present days. You must know that the good
King Uther has of late made war against the pagan brothers, Octa and
Oza, who are newly come to this country from the lands which lie about
the Northern Sea, and has won a great victory over them and their
people, and that all Britain is now in a great flame of war. My counsel
therefore is, seeing that armed men are everywhere, let us make
ourselves as armed men. Let our hands, weak though they be by nature,
learn to handle the spear and the sword, nor shall we fail therein, for
there are no scholars so apt as they who have need for their teacher.
And, indeed, my daughter, you are one who should easily learn such
matters, for you are both tall and strong, and need practice only, which
being had, you should be as truly martial a maid as you could wish. Nor
is such a thing unknown in the race from which you come. Such was the
bold Boadicea, who reigned in old time over the Iceni, for she made
haughty Rome to tremble before her, and others, as Gwendolen and
Emmilen. Hear also this thing which I saw with my own eyes. On the
battlefield at Menevia, where King Uther last fought against the pagan
hosts, there was a Saxon virgin who thrice struck to the earth the great
Ulfin himself. Verily she had slain him as he lay, but that Caradoc held
her hand, and Caradoc himself had much ado to escape from her without
hurt.”

“Tell me, I pray you, her name,” said Britomart.

“They call her Angela,” the nurse made answer, “and she is as fair as
she is strong. She is the leader of a tribe who are more to be feared
than all other Saxons; they call themselves Angles.”

Much was the maiden moved by this tale, so that she made her resolve,
unknown to her father, to take upon herself all the duties and
adventures which were fitting to a knight. And she said to her nurse:
“See, Glaucé, that you have all things ready that are convenient to my
new estate.” And this Glaucé did with all readiness and care. Fortune
also helped in the matter; for about this time a band of Britons, being
abroad on a foray, took a great spoil of Saxon goods, and among them
goodly armour decked with gold, and arms of proof which belonged to the
Saxon queen Angela. These spoils King Ryence commanded to be hung up in
the chapel of his palace, that they might be a memorial for all time of
the great victory which God had given to his arms. Into this same chapel
Glaucé led the maiden Britomart late in the night when no one was near,
and taking down the armour, clad her in it, and she gave her the arms
also, chief among these being a wonderful spear which King Bladud had
made by magical arts many years before. This virtue it had, that
whosoever might be struck by the point thereof, could not stay in his
saddle, but must be borne to the ground. And when Glaucé had so
furnished the maiden with due equipment of war, then she took for
herself such arms and armour as befitted a squire, and put them on. This
done, they left the place by secret ways, unseen of any. Thus did it
happen that Britomart came in guise of a knight into the company of Sir
Guyon and the Red-Cross Knight.

Not long after this they parted from each other, for the Knight had an
errand of his own, and Britomart was bent on the finding of Sir
Artegall. Many miles did she ride, and through many lands did she
travel, till at last she came to the shore of the sea. There she lighted
from off her horse and bade Glaucé unlace her helmet, and sat down upon
a rock to rest awhile and refresh herself with the breeze that blew from
off the waves. And as she sat, she thought within herself: “Ah me, how
like is love to this restless sea! How shall my frail bark escape where
there are so many dangers, and no certain guide?” So she spake to
herself, sighing the while; weep she would not, for tears, she thought,
did not become a knight. But Glaucé comforted her, calling to her mind
what Merlin had prophesied about the things to come. Nor were these
words in vain; but there soon befell a thing which roused her more than
many words. She spied a knight in shining armour riding towards her in
all haste, with his spear in rest as one that had some hostile purpose.
Quickly she mounted her horse, and bade Glaucé lace her helmet, and
addressed herself without delay to battle. Now, by the time she had put
her shield in place and made ready her spear, the knight was close at
hand.

“Sir Knight,” said he, “know you that you travel on this road against my
strict commands? I suffer not any to pass by this way. Others who have
so trespassed have come by their death. Therefore I counsel you to go
back while there is yet time.”

She made answer in few words: “Let them fly who have need for flight.
You may frighten children with your words. As for passing by this way, I
am prepared to do it, even without your leave. Verily, I will pass or
die.” Scarcely had she spoken when the stranger knight rode at her with
his spear in rest. He smote her full on the breast, and she bowed her
head, so fierce was the stroke, till it well-nigh touched the crupper of
her saddle. But her counter-stroke was deadlier by far. The spear-point
passed through his shield and through his cuirass, and, glancing thence,
pierced his left side. The power of the stroke bore him from the saddle,
and laid him bleeding on the ground, where he lay wallowing in his
blood. So fell the knight, Sir Marinell, upon the shore which he called
his own. And Britomart rode on; and as she went she saw pearls and
precious stones of every kind, and ingots of gold half buried in the
sand. Much she wondered to see such riches, but she would not descend
for a single hour. What were jewels or precious stones or gold to her,
that they should hinder her in her quest?

The story of Sir Marinell, briefly told, is this. His mother was a
daughter of Nereus, God of the Sea, and his father a mortal man. He was
reared up in arms, and became a great and famous knight. And he had for
his possession this same shore; a place in which Nature of her own will
had set much riches, pearls and precious stones and the like, and to
which, by the ordering of Nereus, great store of the treasure which the
sea swallows up through shipwreck was brought, for his daughter made
request of the same for her son. This coast, then, he most jealously
guarded against all comers. And being, as has been said, valiant and
strong and expert in arms, and also because he knew the place and was
able to take a new-comer unawares, he seemed to be invincible. Many
knights, seeking to pass along the coast, for, indeed, the fame of its
treasures was spread abroad, were slain, and yet more, being vanquished
in battle, for life’s sake, submitted themselves to him, and became
vassals and servants to him. One hundred knights, men of name all of
them, were so bound to his service. In the end, Sir Marinell, what with
the multitude of his riches, and the pride of having so many knights of
renown at his beck and call, became not a little puffed up, and his
mother, knowing that the wise man had said of old, “Pride goeth before a
fall,” would fain know how he might be kept from mischief. So she went
to a certain god of the sea, Proteus by name, who had the gift of
foretelling things to come. And Proteus said to her: “My daughter, keep
this thy son from all womankind, for from a woman he shall have a deadly
hurt.” And the mother, taking these words to be spoken of woman’s love,
set her son’s mind against all such things, and did most carefully keep
him from all company of women. And he, to do her pleasure, obeyed her in
this matter, yet could not so escape his fate. And this fate was all the
harder, because this knight was beloved of a fair and virtuous maiden,
Florimell by name, whom he might have wedded much to his joy and profit.
Of this same Florimell more shall be told hereafter.

Britomart, after having thus vanquished Sir Marinell, still went on her
quest, and came at night to the castle of a certain Malbecco. To this
same place there had also come, earlier by the space of an hour or so,
two other knights, Sir Paridell and Sir Satyrane. It was this same
Satyrane that helped the Lady Una in her wanderings when she was parted
by evil chance from the Red-Cross Knight. To them Sir Paridell’s squire
had said: “My lords, you will not find entertainment here. The master of
this castle, Malbecco by name, is a mere churl, and hates all company,
and this for two reasons: the first of these reasons is that his mind is
wholly set on riches, and he hates all doings by which they may seem to
be wasted; and the second is that he, being old and crabbed, is wedded
to a very fair young wife, whom he would fain keep from the sight of all
eyes but his own. Verily he keeps her as in prison.”

When Sir Paridell heard the squire’s story, he said: “Why do we suffer
this old dotard to behave himself in this churlish fashion? ’Twere
better to kill the villain and spoil his home.”

“Nay,” said Sir Satyrane, who was a loyal and true knight, and would
fain bear himself honestly to all men; “we will first gently entreat
this man to give us entertainment. And if he will not listen to gentle
words, then will we threaten him; for some who heed not fair words will
take account of foul. And if we accomplish nothing either by entreaties
or by threats, then we will make our way into his dwelling by force, and
deal with him as he deserves.”

“So be it,” said Sir Paridell, and coming to the gate he knocked. “Sir
Porter,” he said, “two knights seek shelter and entertainment.”

Now the porter was Malbecco himself, for it was his custom to play the
porter’s part. He answered: “All in this house, my friend, are now gone
to their beds, and the keys have been taken to the master of the house,
and he also is in his bed, nor is there anyone so bold that would
venture to wake him from his sleep. I pray you, therefore, to be patient
and to seek entertainment elsewhere.”

The two knights were not a little wroth at this fellow’s churlishness,
but knew not what they should do, for he took no heed, neither of
blandishments nor of threats. And while they parleyed with him, the sky
was overcast, and there came so bitter a blast of wind and so fierce a
storm of rain and hail that they were constrained to depart and seek
shelter in a little hut that was near at hand, being a sty for pigs.
While they were faring as best they could in this place, there came
another knight to the castle gate. He also sought for entertainment and
was denied, and he also, under compulsion from the storm, sought shelter
in the hut. And when, the place being indeed already filled, he was not
suffered to enter, he fell into a great rage.

“Nay,” said he, “this will I not suffer. Either I will lodge with you,
or you shall be dislodged. Choose then whether of these two things ye
will have.” The two knights scarce knew how they should answer him. They
liked not to deny him lodging, and they liked not to yield to his
boasting. But of the two Paridell was the less disposed to take the
matter patiently.

“Who is this fellow,” said he, “who talks to me as though he were rating
a dog in a kennel? Of a truth, if he is a dog of spirit, he would rather
die than lie like a coward in a corner.” So saying, he issued forth, and
came to blows with the stranger. And doubtless mischief had been done
but that the good Satyrane made peace between them. This done, they
agreed together to punish the lord of the castle for his churlishness.
So they went back to the gate, and Paridell cried aloud: “Hark, Sir
Porter, whoever you are, if you open not this gate, then we will burn
this place and all that is therein with fire.”

When Malbecco heard this, perceiving that they were in earnest, he ran
with all speed and called to them from the castle walls. “Bear with me,
fair sirs,” he cried, “and pardon me, seeing that I am so ill-served.
These loutish knaves of mine know not their duty, and fail to attend as
they should upon strangers.” When they heard this, the knights consented
to let the matter be, though they believed not a word of what the man
had said. So they entered the castle. Being within the walls, they rid
themselves of their armour, for they were fain to dry their garments at
the fire. And lo! when the last come of the three took off his helmet,
the hair, which was of golden hue, broke loose from its tie and fell
down to her feet, like the sunbeams that fall from a cloud; and when she
doffed her coat of mail and let down the pleated frock she had tucked up
for convenience’ sake in riding, then it was plain to see that she was a
woman, and indeed the very fairest of women; for in sooth this last come
of the three knights was Britomart.




                             CHAPTER XVIII
                        SIR SCUDAMORE AND AMORET


Britomart, riding forth on the day following from Malbecco’s Castle,
came to a fountain whereby a knight was lying stretched upon the ground.
His cuirass and his helmet and his spear lay near him, and his shield,
on which was the emblem of love, as a boy with wings, was thrown
carelessly on the ground. He lay with his face upon the ground, and it
seemed as if he were asleep, so that Britomart of her courtesy held
back, lest perchance she should wake him. But as she stood, she heard
him groan, and after break forth into bitter complaining: “O God,” he
cried, “who rulest in bliss among Thy saints, why sufferest Thou such
cruel deeds to be done? Hast Thou no care for the cause of the innocent?
Is Thy justice asleep? What doth it profit a man to do righteously if
righteousness find no reward? Never was there on earth a creature more
gracious than my Amoret; and lo! for seven months the tyrant Busirane
holds her in prison, and all, forsooth, because she will not deny her
Scudamore. And I, this same Scudamore, am safe and sound, and yet can
help her not at all!” Then he burst forth into a storm of sobs. So
shaken and disturbed was he with the torment of his grief, that
Britomart feared that he might even die. So, stooping down, she touched
him lightly on the shoulder. Whereat he, starting up, looked to see what
had happened; and finding that it was but a stranger knight, he threw
himself again upon the ground.

Then said Britomart: “Sir Knight, whose sorrow seems to overpass your
patience, I would counsel you to submit your will to the providence of
God. Remember, if you will, that virtue and faith are mightier than the
very worst of sorrows. Surely he who cannot bear the burden of this
world’s distresses must not think to live, for life is a distressful
thing. And now, tell me what this villain of whom you speak has done.
Maybe this hand of mine may help you to win relief and redress.”

Then said the knight: “Ah me! it is idle to complain of what may not be
cured. I fear me much that there is no remedy for this trouble. How can
we deliver my Amoret from the dungeon in which this tyrant holds her,
and all because she will not accept his love, nor be false to me? For,
indeed, he has fortified the place with such magic charms that no power
of man can overcome them.”

“Nevertheless,” said Britomart, “we will make our endeavour.”

“Why should you die for me?” said the knight. “It is enough that I
should perish, who deserve it well.”

“Nay,” cried Britomart, “life is not lost if the fame that dies not be
bought with it.”

So at last she persuaded him to rise from the ground. His armour she
helped him to put on, and his horse, which had strayed away, she brought
back to him. Then they set off for the magician’s castle, which was but
a bow-shot away. But when they were arrived, lo! there was no gate, no,
nor porter, nor watchman, but in the porch there was a flaming fire and
a great smoke of sulphur; so fierce was the fire and so thick the smoke
that they were compelled to fall back.

“To run into danger without thought, Sir Knight,” said Britomart, “is
becoming to a beast, not to a man. Let us think, therefore, how we may
most prudently deal with this enemy.”

“Alas!” answered Sir Scudamore, for this was the knight’s name, “here
you see the doleful straits in which I stand. This is the trouble of
which I complained. By no cleverness or strength or valor may these
flames be quenched, for no man can undo the enchantments by which they
have been kindled. Leave me to my complaints. Fair Amoret must dwell as
before in this evil prison, and Scudamore must die of sorrow.”

“By heaven!” cried Britomart, “it were a shameful thing to give up some
noble purpose for fear of danger, without some venture made. Let us make
a trial at the least, and see what shall come to pass.”

And as she spoke the bold maiden threw her broad shield before her face,
and pointing her sword straight in front of her, threw herself upon the
fire; and behold the flames straightway parted asunder, leaving a space
in the middle through which she passed, as a flash of lightning passes
through the clouds. And when Sir Scudamore saw how she had traversed the
fire safe and untouched, he essayed to follow her. But whether it was
that there was a certain jealousy in his heart, or some less pure
desire, or some lack of faith, to him the flames yielded not one jot.
His pride and fierceness availed him nothing; he was constrained to
return most piteously burnt. Greatly was he troubled at this defeat, so
that he threw himself on the ground and groaned aloud in the bitterness
of his heart.

Britomart meanwhile had made her way into the palace of the Enchanter.
The first chamber was a wondrous place, all its walls being covered with
tapestries picturing the triumphs of love. Many a strange tale of the
gods might there be seen, and with the gods was shown a great multitude
of men and women, both of high degree and low, kings and queens and
knights and ladies, and peasants and women who worked with their hands,
for love has no respect of person, and there are none but feel his
power. And round about the tapestries was woven a border of broken bows
and shivered arrows, and through them flowed as it were a river of
blood. At the end of the chamber was an altar, and on the altar was set
the image of a boy. Blindfolded was he, and in his hand he held a deadly
bow with an arrow set. And on his shoulders he carried a quiver, and
some of the shots were tipped with gold and some with lead, and under
his foot was a dragon which had been smitten through with a dart. Under
his feet was written this inscription: “The Conqueror of the Gods.” All
this the maid beheld, and also she saw that over every door in the
chamber, and there were many such doors, the words were written: “Be
Bold!” But over one door at the very end of the chamber were these words
to be seen, “Be not Over-Bold.” Much she marvelled to see no living
creature, for the whole place was silent and empty. But the day being
now far spent, she lay down to sleep, but was careful to keep her arms
close at hand should need arise.

She slept not untroubled. First there was the sound of a great trumpet;
but whether it were blown for victory or for warning she knew not. And
after the trumpet there was a great storm of wind, with thunder and
lightning, and after the lightning an earthquake, and after the
earthquake a great stench and smoke of sulphur, yet was not Britomart
one whit dismayed. Then, as she wondered what these things might mean, a
great whirlwind blew throughout the house, and the door over which the
words “Be not Over-Bold” were written, flew open of its own accord. And
out of it there issued a marvellous array.

First came Fancy, in likeness of a lovely boy, and after him Desire, and
then Doubt, ever looking about him with restless eyes, and Danger, and
Fear, who ever kept his eye on Danger, and Hope in the semblance of a
happy maiden, and Suspicion, and Grief and Fury, and many more, which it
were long to name one by one. Thrice did they march round the chamber,
and then returned to that within from which they had come forth. And
when the last had passed through, the door shut as it had opened at the
first, of its own accord. And when the maid would have passed through
it, she found it locked fast against her and beyond all her strength to
open. Then, finding that she could do nothing by force, she had recourse
to craft, purposing not to depart from the chamber till the next night
should come, and with the night the same procession of figures should
come forth. And so it fell out, and when the door opened next of its own
accord, then Britomart went boldly in. Not one single figure did she see
of all that wondrous company. There was no living creature in the
chamber, save one lady of woeful aspect, whose hands were bound fast
together, while round her waist was a chain which bound her to a pillar.
And before her sat the Enchanter, making strange characters, which were
among the devices of his art. In blood he drew them, and the blood
seemed to be drawn from the woeful lady’s heart by an arrow which was
fastened in her side. When the Enchanter saw the maid he cast his magic
book in haste to the ground, and drawing from his vest a murderous
knife, made as though he would have thrust it into the lady’s side. But
the maid caught his hand and mastered him. Not so completely did she
quell him but that with a sudden wrench he turned the dagger upon her
and struck it into her chest. It was but a shallow wound, but it moved
her wrath, and she, drawing forth her sword, dealt him a mighty blow, so
that he fell half dead upon the ground. But as she made ready to smite
him again, the woeful lady cried: “Slay him not, for if he die then am I
here fast bound for ever; for only he that has bound can loosen.”

Full wroth was Britomart to spare so foul a wretch. Nevertheless, for
the lady’s sake, she held her hand, and said: “O wicked man, death, or
that which is worse than death, if such there be, is the due reward of
your crimes. Nevertheless you may live if you will restore this lady to
her first estate.” To this the wretch, so reprieved beyond all hope,
gave a willing consent, and taking up his book began to reverse his evil
charms. Many a dreadful thing did he read which the lady heard with
trembling, seeing that they had brought her to this evil plight. And all
the while Britomart stood, with her sword drawn over his head, ready to
smite him if he should fail of his promise. And now all the house began
to shake around them, and the doors to rattle. Yet was not the maid
dismayed, but watched the villain as he undid the charm. And now the
chain was broken from off the lady’s hands, and that which did bind her
to the pillar was severed, and the pillar itself fell into ruins, and
the steel by which her life-blood was drained away came forth from the
wound, no one drawing it, and the wound itself was closed and the lady
herself restored to her first estate.

When she found herself thus whole again, she poured out her heart in
thanks to the maid, throwing herself upon the ground before her. “Gentle
lady,” said Britomart, “it is reward enough to have done you this
service. And now forget your trouble, and take comfort to yourself and
comfort also the true knight who has suffered so much for your sake.”
Right glad was Amoret to hear such kindly words of the man whom she
loved. Then did Britomart take the chain with which Amoret had been
bound and bind the Enchanter with it. And this was a fit beginning of
the punishment which was to fall upon him. This done, they turned to
depart, and as they passed through the Enchanter’s abode, lo! all the
grace and glory had departed from it; all the fair picturings were
defaced, and when they came to the fiery porch, the flames were
vanished, and the place was like to a torch that is half burned.

But as nothing in the world is without trouble, so to their great
trouble they found no one awaiting them; neither did Amoret see Sir
Scudamore, nor Britomart her squire.




                              CHAPTER XIX
                       OF SIR PARIDELL AND OTHERS


It was, in truth, a great deliverance that Britomart had worked for the
Lady Amoret. Nevertheless this same lady was somewhat in doubt how she
should bear herself to her deliverer. For, on the one hand, she was well
aware that all her love and homage was due to Sir Scudamore, nor was
there aught in her heart that hindered her from rendering it. It should
be told indeed that she was not only betrothed to this same Scudamore,
but verily wedded, only it had come to pass on the very wedding-day,
when the guests were somewhat overtaken with wine, that the enchanter
Busyrane had entered the palace, and, under cover of a jest, had carried
her away into captivity. So now she said to herself:

“This is a very noble knight, and it irks me to show him any
discourtesy; yet, on the other hand, I fear me much lest I should seem
in any wise disloyal to my own dear lord,” for she knew not that
Britomart was a maid. And Britomart, on her part, desiring that the
secret should not be known, bore herself with a certain freedom. Nothing
unseemly did she say or do; but none had guessed her to be what she was.

As they journeyed together they came to a castle, where a great company
of knights and ladies had assembled to hold a tournament. Now it was a
custom of tournament that every knight entering the lists bore the
colours of some lady, and averred that she was the fairest of all
ladies, and that he would prove it with spear and sword. Thus it came to
pass that when the knights were gathered together, and the master of the
ceremony asked of each his lady’s name, a certain young and lusty knight
cried out, “My lady is the fair Amoret, and that I will avow with spear
and sword.”

When Britomart heard these words she was not a little wroth;
nevertheless she dissembled her anger, and said only, “I am loath to
make strife; but this young man must needs make good his words!” So they
jousted together, and the knight was easily overthrown, being thus made
to suffer for coveting that which was not his. But Britomart, seeing
that he was a brave man, and being herself as courteous as she was
strong, cast about how she could save his honour. She said, therefore,
to the master of the ceremony: “Let me have this knight for my
champion.” And as she spoke she doffed her helmet, and her golden hair,
which had been cunningly coiled up within, fell down to her very feet.
All that stood by, both ladies and knights, were not a little amazed.

Some said, “This is wrought by magic!” others, “This is Bellona’s self
that has come among mortal men.” As for the young knight, he worshipped
her as though she were divine, and the fair Amoret, all her doubts being
removed, was knit to her in the closest bonds of affection and
tenderness.

The next morning they departed together from the castle, the one ever
cherishing in her heart the thought of Sir Artegall and the other of Sir
Scudamore. After a while they were aware of two knights riding towards
them, having each a lady at his side; ladies, indeed, they were not,
save in outward appearance, for one was the false Duessa, the other was
called Até, which name by interpretation is Strife, than whom there is
no more baleful creature under the sun, and she has her dwelling hard by
the gates of hell. Many ways are there by which a man may go into that
place, but none by which he may come forth. And the walls on every side
are hung with the rent robes and broken sceptres of kings, shivered
spears and shields torn in twain, spoils of Babylon and of Rome, relics
of great empires that have been and are no more. Até herself was hideous
to behold, if one could see her as she was in truth. But now she was
fair to look at, for she had put on, as can all evil things, the
semblance of beauty.

The knight who rode by her side was a certain Blandamour, gallant and
strong, and most expert in arms, but of a fickle and inconstant heart;
and he that was companion to the false Duessa was Sir Paridell. When Sir
Blandamour saw from afar Britomart and Amoret, he said to Sir Paridell:
“See you, my friend, that knight with a lady by his side? There is a
fair adventure for you!” But Sir Paridell, for now they were near enough
to discern the fashion of Britomart’s arms, perceived that this knight
bore the like scutcheon to one by whom he had of late been worsted in
battle; nor was he minded to tempt his fate again.

“I know that knight full well, Sir Blandamour,” he said; “he proved his
skill on me, and I count it folly when he who has escaped a danger
challenges it again.”

“Then I,” replied Sir Blandamour, “will try my fortune; take you,
meanwhile, this dame in charge.” And he laid his spear in rest and
charged. Britomart, on her part, made ready to receive him, and gave him
an uncouth welcome. Scarce had they met than he found himself lying
helpless on the ground. Meanwhile his conquering adversary rode on, not
deigning so much as to say a single word.

When his companions saw in what an evil plight he was, they hastened to
his help, and put him on his steed, for mount himself he could not, and
held him up as he rode. Ill-content he was that he had ventured so much
and won so little.

After that they had journeyed awhile, they saw two knights coming
towards them across the plain. When Sir Blandamour perceived them, he
grieved more than ever for his late mishap, for he saw that one of them
was his old enemy Sir Scudamore, knowing him to be such by the device
that he wore, to wit, the god of love with his wings spread out on this
side and on that. “Here,” he said to himself, “is evil fortune! Yonder
is my enemy, and I am so bruised with this late encounter that I cannot
do battle with him.” Then he said to Sir Paridell: “My friend, will you,
of your affection, do somewhat for me, even as I have done for you? My
hurts keep me back from battle, but I have just cause of enmity against
yonder knight. Will you, therefore, maintain this my cause against him?”

Sir Paridell answered: “Trouble not yourself. There is a proverb that
the left hand rubs the right. As you have fought for me, so will I for
you.” Forthwith he laid his spear in rest, and charged, swift as an
arrow from a bow. Nor was Sir Scudamore slow to make himself ready. So
they met in fierce encounter, and with so great a shock, that both were
driven from their saddles, and they lay stretched upon the ground. Sir
Scudamore was soon on his feet again, and said to the other: “Laggard,
why lie you so long?” But Sir Paridell lay tumbled in a heap, without
sense or speech, all unheeding of his adversary’s reproach. Then his
companion ran to him, and unlaced his helmet, and loosened his coat of
mail, and so brought him back to feeling; but not a word did he speak.
Then said Sir Blandamour:

“False knight, you have overcome by craft a better man than yourself. It
is well for you that I am not in such good case to-day that I can avenge
him.”

To this Sir Scudamore made no answer, though there was great anger in
his heart. Then the false Duessa, not seeing how her ends would be
served by a quarrel between these two, would have made peace between
them. But, on the other hand, Até made up a fresh contention, for she
turned Sir Scudamore against Amoret, slandering that true lady with
false tales of how she had given her love to a stranger knight, who,
indeed, was none other than Britomart. Nor was she content with this,
but she made a quarrel also between Paridell and Blandamour. And the
contention between these two grew so hot that they were ready to do
battle with each other. What had been the end thereof none can say, but
by good luck there came that way a certain squire who was well known to
both, and not a little beloved by them. No easy thing was it for him to
get hearing from the two, so full of fury were they. Yet, at the last,
he persuaded them to stay their hands. This done, he said: “Brave
knights, you ought to be at peace and not at variance. There are those
that seek your harm, and you would do well to ally yourselves against
them.” Thus he persuaded them to swear friendship again. So being
reconciled, they pursued their journey. After a while they saw two
knights and two ladies with them, and they sent on their squire to
inquire who these might be. And when the squire came back to his company
he said: “These are two famous knights, brave Cambell and stout
Triamond; and the ladies are Cambina, who is wife to Cambell, and
Canacé, who is wedded to Triamond. But would it please you, gentle sirs,
to hear their story, for I know it well, and it is worth the hearing?”

Sir Blandamour answered, “Speak on.” So the squire told this tale that
follows.




                               CHAPTER XX
               THE STORY OF CANACÉ AND THE THREE BROTHERS


There was a great lady in Fairyland, Agapé by name, who had three sons,
born all of them at one birth; and the names of the three were Priamond,
Diamond, and Triamond. Also she had a daughter, Cambina by name. Now the
Lady Agapé greatly desired to know how long her sons should live, for
they, having a mortal for their father, must needs die some day, whereas
she, being of fairy race, was immortal. Having, therefore, this thought
in her mind, she made her way to the place where the three Fates sit by
the distaff spinning the lines of Life. One sister draws out the thread,
and another turns the spindle, and yet another, sitting by with the
shears in her hand, cuts the thread when the due time is come. Deep in
the hidden places of the earth was the dwelling of the three, and the
way thereto was dark and hard to find; but Agapé had in her heart all
the wisdom of Fairyland, nor did she fail to accomplish her purpose.
When she had come to the place she sat awhile, and watched the sisters
at their work. At last, having seen all that they did, she declared why
she had come: “I have three sons,” she said, “mortal men, though I
myself am immortal; and I greatly desire to know how long they will
live.” One of the sisters, she that held the shears, was very angry when
she heard these words: “You have done ill,” she said, “in coming here on
this errand. These things are not for anyone, mortal or immortal, to
know. You deserve to be smitten with the Curse of Jupiter—you and your
children with you.”

[Illustration: Agapé approaching the Dwelling of the Fates.]

Agapé was greatly frightened at these words. Still she held to her
purpose, and with many prayers and entreaties prevailed upon her that
held the spindle, for she was less hard of heart than the sister who
held the shears, to show her the threads of the three youths. When she
saw them she cried, “I pray you draw them out longer and of a stouter
thread.”

“Nay,” said the sister, “think you, O foolish one, that the purposes of
the Fates may be changed as are the purposes of men? It is not so; what
they decree stands fast for ever; the gods may not move it by one
hair’s-breadth, no, nor the ruler of the gods himself.”

Then answered Agapé: “If this be so, if you cannot add one jot to the
thread of any man’s life, still there is a boon which you can give me. I
see the thread of my eldest son, and it is, I perceive, the shortest of
the three. Grant that when it is cut with the shears, it may be added to
the thread of the second, and that in like manner when the thread of the
second is cut, it may be joined to the third. So shall he have a treble
portion, and yet the whole shall not have been increased.”

The sisters said, “This shall be so.” Thereupon the Lady Agapé departed
to her own home. She told her sons nothing of this journey which she had
taken, or of the things which she had seen and heard, or of the boon
which had been granted to her in the matter of their lives. But she said
to them, not at that time only, but after, whenever she could find
occasion: “O my sons, be careful and walk in safe ways; but, above all
things, love one another, whatever may befall.” And this they did all
their lives. Never was there any strife between them, but only great
friendship and concord, of which the most signal proof is now to be
told.

There was a fair lady in those parts, Canacé by name, who was wiser than
all the women of her day. She knew all the powers of nature, and could
see beforehand the things that should come to pass, and knew the speech
of beasts and birds. And as she was wise above all others, so also did
she excel in goodness. To these things she added also a singular beauty,
so that many lords and knights of the land came to woo her. To these she
bare herself rightly courteously, but favoured none, no, not so much as
by a word or a look. But it came to pass, as is the way in such matters,
that the more she held herself aloof, the more eagerly did these lords
and knights urge their suit upon her. And not a few quarrels came about
on her account, one suitor meeting another in battle. Now this Canacé
had a brother, Cambell by name, as brave and stout a knight as ever
lived. And he, seeing that great mischief might arise out of these
quarrels concerning his sister, caused all her wooers to come together,
and made this proclamation among them:

“Ye Lords and Knights that seek my sister Canacé in marriage, choose now
from among yourselves the three whom you judge to be the boldest and
most skilful in battle among you, and let them meet me in combat, man by
man, and it shall be that whosoever of the three shall prevail over me
shall have my sister to wife.”

Now this Cambell was, as has been already said, a brave knight and a
stout; yet for all his strength and courage he had scarcely dared to
stand up in this fashion against so many. For, indeed, it might well
come to pass, such are the chances of battle, that one or other might
prevail over him, not being the better man, but by reason of some
accident. But there was that which encouraged him to dare so much, to
wit, a magic ring which his sister had given him. It was a ring of many
virtues, but the chief of them all was this, that if he who wore it
should be wounded, this ring straightway staunched the bleeding.

Now this matter of the magic ring and its marvellous virtues was known
to all, and the suitors of the Lady Canacé were, for the most part,
terrified by it, so that they would not venture on the battle. “Fair she
is without doubt,” they said, “but it would be a fool’s part to venture
life even for her.” Nevertheless there were three among them who were
not of this way of thinking, and these three were the brothers Priamond,
Diamond, and Triamond. They all loved the Princess, and yet, so
brotherly were they in heart and mind, that there was not a thought of
anger or jealousy among them. “Let her choose,” said they, “between us,
and we will be content with her choice. Or, if the judgment be left to
the sword, then let him be preferred who shall overcome this her brother
Cambell.”

So the three addressed themselves to the battle in the order of their
age. First came Priamond, the eldest, a stout knight to hold his place,
but he was not so strong to strike as are some. He loved to fight on
foot, and his arms were the spear and the battle-axe. Next to him was
Diamond; he was one to deal mighty blows, but he was not so good in
holding his ground. Whether he were on horseback or on foot he cared
not, so that he had his battle-axe in hand, for with this he loved to
fight. Last of all came Triamond. There was no man better than he,
whether to stand or to strike; the fight on horseback pleased him best,
and his arms were spear and shield.

On a set day the lists were prepared. Barriers were made to keep off the
press of the people. At one end sat six judges, who should see that all
things were done decently and in order, and that neither this warrior
nor that should take undue advantage; and at the other was set the fair
Canacé on a stage, that she might see the battle and herself be seen.
The first that came into the lists was Sir Cambell. Noble was his mien
and assured his look, as of one that knew certainly that he should
prevail. After him advanced the three brothers, bravely attired and
shining in arms, each with his banner borne before him. Thrice did they
bow themselves before the fair Canacé, and then a blast of the trumpet
gave the signal for battle.

First of the three to meet Sir Cambell came Priamond; well skilled in
arms were the two, and for long they fought without advantage to one or
the other. Mighty the blows that they dealt, but both had watchful eyes
and ready skill to turn the deadliest stroke aside. The first gain fell
to Sir Priamond, for his spear, whether by good fortune or by skill it
were hard to say, passed by his adversary’s shield and pierced the
shoulder where a joint of the armour gave it access. Deep was the wound,
and though no blood flowed therefrom—such was the virtue of the magic
ring—it stung the warrior to the quick with keenest pain. There are
whose spirit is quelled with pain; but Sir Cambell was not of these. The
smart did but rouse his courage to the utmost, and put new strength into
his arm. Straightway he drave his spear close underneath Sir Priamond’s
shield and smote him on the thigh. The coat of mail did not stay it, but
that it made a grisly wound, and the stout knight tottered with the
blow, even as an old oak, withered and sapless, rocks with every blast
of the wind. Nor did Cambell fail to use the occasion. He smote him yet
again upon the side, making another deadly wound, and though the spear
brake with the blow, he did not abate his onset, but drave the shaft
through the visor of Sir Priamond’s helmet, and laid him low upon the
ground. So fell the first of the three brothers; yet did not his soul
depart, but by virtue of the gift of the Fates it passed into the bodies
of the two that yet remained, making them stronger and more eager for
the fray.

Nevertheless, when Sir Diamond addressed himself to the battle, the
lists having been cleared afresh, and the trumpet sounded a second time,
he fared no better than his brother. For a while the two stood face to
face, giving and receiving equal blows, but without advantage either to
the one or to the other. But then a great gust of wrath swept through
Sir Diamond’s soul, driving away all thought but of how he might most
speedily avenge his brother. And, indeed, the very soul of the brother
stirred within him. So he lifted high his mighty battle-axe, swinging it
over his head, and bringing it down on his adversary with all the force
that was in his body. And, surely, had the blow fallen as it was meant,
there had been an end of strife. No magic ring had availed to stay so
dreadful an onset. It had crushed out Sir Cambell’s life, whether with
or without the shedding of blood. But fortune helped him in his need,
for judging where the axe would fall, he swerved aside, so that the
stroke missed the mark, and the striker’s right foot slid from under
him. So we may see a hawk strike at a heron with all his might; so
strong is the blow, that it would seem as if nothing could turn it
aside; but the heron, a wary bird, sees it come, and lightly avoids it,
so that the hawk is well-nigh brought to the ground ere the force of his
onset is sped. So fared it with Sir Diamond; not only so, but while he
reached forward with his left arm to recover himself, he left his side
unguarded by the shield. Which thing Sir Cambell did not fail to
perceive, for swinging his axe, he smote him between the topmost rings
of the coat of mail and the lowest rings of the helmet, which spot is
ever dangerous to the warrior, how well soever he be armed. There did
Sir Cambell smite Sir Diamond, with an arm so sure and deadly that he
shore his head from his body.

And now ensued the fiercest fight of all, yea, and also the strangest.
Well might a man wonder to see how Sir Cambell stood up, neither faint
nor weary, for all that he had been changing blows for the space of an
hour and more. Yet did he seem even fresher and brighter than at his
first taking of arms, just as some great serpent wakes from the long
sleep of winter, when the warm breath of spring has touched him, and
throws off the ragged skin of his old estate, and raises himself in the
sunshine with all the glory of his youth renewed. Such freshness and
vigour did the magic ring work in calling out all the strength that he
had, for all the magic in the world had not availed to help a coward or
a sluggard. Against him stood a worthy foe, with the might of three
stout champions in his heart and in his limbs. Once and again, yea, many
times, did it seem that this or that warrior had prevailed. Now was
Cambell beaten to his knee, till all the company thought he must needs
lose the day, and now was Triamond stretched upon the ground, like to
one who has received a mortal wound. And once, indeed, the two lay
together at full length, as though they had been dead. The judges rose
from their place, and the marshals of the lists came forward as to carry
the two corpses to the appointed place, and the fair Canacé cried out in
her despair, for it seemed as if both brother and lover had been taken
from her at once. But lo! in a moment the two were standing on their
feet again, and addressing themselves anew to the battle. What had been
the end, whether the virtue of the magic ring had overcome the triple
might of him in whom dwelt the spirits of three brave men, who can say?
For now there was heard such a clamour, such a confusion of voices, such
a shouting of men and wailing of women and shrill crying of children,
that all turned their faces to look, and the two champions by common
consent stayed their hands till they could see what strange things had
happened. And, indeed, it was a marvellous sight that they saw. There
came speeding along the ground, fast as a thunder-cloud that rides the
sky, a chariot richly adorned with gold and purple in the Persian
fashion. Two lions from the forest drew it, mighty beasts, such as could
not be surpassed for strength and fierceness in any land, but now they
had forgotten their savageness to obey the pleasure of their driver. And
this was a lady of wonderful beauty, and not less wise than fair, for
she had been taught all the arts of wholesome magic by the fairy, her
mother. In her right hand she carried a wand with two serpents twined
about it, and in her left a cup filled to the brim with nepenthe, the
wondrous drink of which he that tastes straightway forgets all grief and
anger and care.

This was the Lady Cambina, daughter of Agapé, and sister to Sir
Triamond, and she, knowing by her art in what deadly peril her dear
brother stood, came to his help. All the people made a way for her to
pass, so that she could approach the lists. These first she struck with
her wand, and they fell at the stroke. Then she said to the two
champions, “Cease now your strife and be at peace.” And when they would
not hear, but made as if to renew the battle, she cast herself upon her
knees and besought them with many prayers and tears to cease from their
anger; and when they still hardened their hearts, she smote them lightly
with her wand. So soon as they felt the touch, the swords dropped from
their hands. Then, as they stood astonished, not knowing what had
befallen them, she gave the cup first to one and then to the other; and
they, as being consumed by mighty thirst, drank each a mighty draught.
Straightway the magic liquor turned all their strife to love; they
clasped hands, and plighted troth to each other, and swore that they
would be friends for ever. And such indeed they were to the end of their
days; ay, and Cambell took to wife Cambina, and Triamond wedded the fair
Canacé.




                              CHAPTER XXI
                         THE STORY OF FLORIMELL


It has been related before how Sir Guyon and Prince Arthur parted
company with Britomart with the purpose of relieving a fair lady in
distress. Now the name of this same lady was Florimell. She was courted
by many knights of high degree, but her love was given to Sir Marinell,
the same that was overthrown by Britomart in the passage by the sea; but
he, on his part, had no thought for her, being mindful of his mother’s
counsel that he should hold himself aloof from all womankind. So fast
did Florimell fly, for she was in grievous fear, that the two knights
who followed with intent to give her help, could by no means overtake
her. After a while the strength of the white palfrey on which she rode
wholly gave out, and she, alighting, made her way on foot, a thing which
she had never done in all her life before, so delicately bred was she.
But need teaches many lessons, this being chief among them, that Fortune
holds the lots of all in equal scales, and has no respect of persons. So
travelling, she came to a hillside, from which, looking down, she espied
a valley thickly covered with trees, and through the tree-tops a thin
vapour of smoke issuing forth. “Here,” she said to herself, “is a
dwelling of man, where haply I may find shelter and rest.” So she bent
her steps thither, and after a while reached the place, being now sorely
spent with trouble and weariness. A dwelling there was, but of the
humblest kind, a little cottage, built with reeds and wattled with sods
of grass. In this there dwelt a witch woman. Most sparely did she live,
careless of all common things, for her mind was wholly given to her art,
for the better and more secure practice of which she lived far from all
neighbours.

When Florimell came in the witch was sitting on the ground, and was so
busied with one of her enchantments that she was taken wholly unawares.
At the first she was overcome with fear, for she would not that any
should surprise her while she was busy with her art. Then, her fear
changing to anger, as, indeed, it is commonly wont to do, she cried in a
loud voice: “Stranger, what mischief has brought you hither? Here, of a
truth, you will find no welcome.”

Florimell answered: “Mother, be not angry with a simple maid, who has
been brought to your dwelling by hard chance, and asks only for leave to
rest awhile.” And as she spoke the tears came trickling down her cheeks,
and she heaved a sigh, so softly and sweetly, that there could be no
creature so hard and savage that would not have pitied her. Even the
witch, for all that her soul was given to mischief, was much moved at
the sight, and sought to comfort her in such rude fashion as she knew,
for even in her the sight of such beauty and virtue moved the hidden
sense of womanhood. So, wiping the tears from the damsel’s eyes, she
bade her rest awhile. This she was nothing loath to do, and sat down
upon the dusty floor, as a bird spent with tempest cowers upon the
ground. After a while she began to set aright the garments that she
wore, and to put in order her golden hair. All this the witch woman saw
with wonder that still waxed greater and greater. “Is this a mortal
maid,” she said to herself, “or one of Diana’s train?”

This same witch woman had a son, very dear to her, and in a sort the
comfort of her age, but a lazy, evil-minded loon, always idling away his
time, and loath to follow any honest trade. He was abroad when Florimell
came to the cottage, and when he returned, he was not a little amazed to
see so fair a creature sitting by his mother’s hearth. But the maiden
bore herself so meekly, fitting herself to the low condition of the
place, that she soon ceased to be strange to mother and son. This was a
thing to be desired; yet it had in it this discomfort, that the witch’s
son began to love her. He would bring gifts for her, such as birds which
he taught to speak her name, and squirrels which, he said, were as
fellow-slaves with himself, and flowers to make garlands for her head.
All these she graciously received. Nevertheless she was not a little
troubled in her heart, for she could not but perceive the love which the
young man bore her. Therefore she determined in herself to depart.

By this time her palfrey was well rested from its weariness, for,
indeed, the young man, the son of the witch, had tended it with all
care. Early, therefore, one morning she put its strappings on the beast,
and so departed.

Great was the anger of the witch and her son when they knew that
Florimell was gone. As for the disappointed lover, his fury passed all
bounds. He beat upon his breast and scratched his face, and tore his
flesh with his teeth. When his mother saw him in so evil a plight, she
did all that she could to comfort him. Tears and prayers she used, and
charms and herbs of might; but all were of no avail. When she saw this,
fearing lest, in his despair, he should bring himself to a violent end,
she said within herself: “I must bring the creature back.” So she called
out of the cave a hideous beast that served her. It was a creature
likest to a hyena, for its back and sides were covered with spots. But
never was seen anything that could be matched with it, so fierce of
aspect was it, and so swift. The witch said to him: “Follow this woman,
and do not leave following till you overtake.”

So the monster followed Florimell, and, as she rode leisurely, soon
overtook her. When she saw him, she set spurs to her palfrey, and he, so
long as he was fresh and full of breath, kept her out of the creature’s
reach. But when his breath failed him, then the monster drew near. This
Florimell perceiving, leapt from her saddle and fled away on her feet.
Now it chanced that she was close to the seashore, and she, being minded
to be drowned, rather than be overtaken by so foul a beast, ran to the
very edge of the waves. There, by good hap, she saw a little shallop
lying, in which the fisherman, an old man and poor, lay asleep, the
while his nets were drying. Into this she leapt, and pushing off the
shallop with an oar, was safe awhile. The monster would not venture on
the sea, for it was not to his liking, and so set out to return to his
mistress the witch, to tell her how his quest had failed. But first he
turned upon the palfrey and rent it.

Scarcely had the beast done this, when there came that way a gallant
knight, Sir Satyrane by name, the same that had befriended the Lady Una
in her distress. He, seeing the palfrey lie dead upon the ground, knew
it for that on which the Lady Florimell had been wont to ride; also he
found the golden girdle which she had been wont to wear, for it had
fallen from her in the haste of her flight. These things greatly
troubled him, and when, looking round, he also saw the monstrous beast
which had pursued her, standing by, his fear was changed to anger, and
he flew upon it and dealt it many blows with all his might. Many wounds
did he give it, causing much blood to pour out of its carcase; but the
beast he subdued not, with such spells had the witch woman fortified it
against all assault. At the last he threw away his sword, for in truth
the steel seemed to avail nothing against the creature’s hide, and
caught it in his arms as if he would have crushed the life out of it;
also he took the girdle of Florimell and bound the beast with it. Never
in truth had it known such constraint, for in a moment all its rage was
quelled, and it followed him meek as a lamb which the shepherd has
rescued from the lion’s mouth. And this, without doubt, it had continued
to do, but for this chance, that Sir Satyrane was called away upon
another adventure. He spied a giantess riding on a dappled grey steed,
holding before her a squire fast bound with chains of wire, and a knight
pursuing her. Therefore he made haste to put himself in her way. She
would have passed him by, but he would not suffer it, running at her
with his spear. Thereupon she was constrained to deal with him, and
would have smitten him with a great mace of iron which she carried in
her hand, and with which she had already slain not a few. But ere she
could deal the blow, his spear came full upon her shield. So great was
the shock, that her horse staggered to and fro; but she was not moved
one whit in her place, nor was the shield broken. Rather the shaft of
the spear was shivered on it, for all it was big and strong. Nor did she
delay to strike him with the mace of iron. Full on his helmet’s crest
she smote him, and that so sturdily that he bowed his head upon his
breast and reeled to and fro like to a drunken man. Which the giantess
perceiving, caught him in her arms, and put him on the saddle before
her, for the squire she had already cast to the ground. Then truly had
Sir Satyrane been in an evil plight, but for the knight that was
pursuing. He, indeed, seeing what had chanced, made the greater haste to
overtake her, but she, not desiring another battle, or because she
especially feared the other knight, threw Sir Satyrane to the ground,
and thus he was delivered. But meanwhile the witch’s monster had
departed.




                              CHAPTER XXII
                         OF THE FALSE FLORIMELL


The monster sped on as fast as it could to the dwelling of its mistress,
the witch woman. When she saw it, she perceived how it was bound with
Florimell’s girdle. At this she rejoiced greatly, and showed the thing
to her son, thinking that he also would rejoice. “See,” said she, “this
thankless creature has not escaped. Behold her girdle.”

But he was otherwise minded. “Surely,” he cried, “she is dead, this
fairest of all maidens!” And it seemed as if he would have torn the very
heart out of his breast. So mad was he with anger and grief, that he
would have slain his mother where she stood. Only she hid herself in a
secret place where she was wont to call up the evil spirits which served
her. And now she summoned them to her help, telling them what had come
to pass. “Counsel me,” she said, “for my son is distraught with anger
and grief and love, and either he will lay violent hands on himself, or
he will slay me, though I have done my very best to serve and help him.”

So the spirits took counsel together in the matter, and by their advice,
her own wicked wit helping, she contrived a marvellous thing. She set
herself to make another Florimell, a false maid, like in all things to
the true, so far as concerned shape and outward semblance. The substance
of which she made her was snow, which she gathered in a secret glade of
the Thracian hills, the spirits of the mountains having revealed to her
the place. This snow she tempered with fine mercury and virgin wax,
which had never been touched with fire. These she mingled with
vermilion, so making a rosy red in the cheeks. And for eyes she set two
lamps, whose fire was marvellously attempered to the likeness of life;
and hair she made of golden wire, more marvellously light than ever was
hair of woman; and for life to make this dead mass move and breathe—for
dead it was for all its beauty—she put one of the spirits which served
her. A wicked spirit was this, none more wicked or crafty, or with a
more cunning art to take the semblance of goodness. There was no need to
teach him how to bear himself. This he knew already; there was no
subtlety or craft in all the wit of woman with which he was not
acquainted. Such was the false Florimell.

This creature she arrayed in some of the garments which the true
Florimell had left behind her, and so brought her to her son, where he
lay groaning on the earth. “See, my son,” she said, “the maid herself
has come back to us.” And when he saw her, he leapt from the ground, and
would have caught her in his arms. But she held back, for the spirit
within her knew well how women bear themselves in such a case, neither
seeming too fond, yet giving such encouragement as might the more
confirm him in his passion. Such was the charge which the witch woman
laid upon him.

One day, as the son was walking with the false Florimell in the wood,
there chanced to come by a certain knight with a squire attending him.
And now it must be said who this fellow was, for, indeed, he was no true
knight. It has been already told how that Sir Guyon, when he was helping
a traveller in distress, had his horse and his spear also stolen from
him. The thing was done by a vain fellow, Bragadocchio by name, who,
seeing the horse and spear ready to his hand, thought that by taking
them he might make himself into a veritable knight. Little had he of his
own but a ready tongue; but this same tongue was no small help with the
more foolish sort. He then, mounting the steed, and taking the spear in
hand, rode on, and so vain was he, and full of self-conceit, that he
hoped to be courteously received for what he seemed to be. And in this
notion his first adventure confirmed him. As he rode along he saw a man
sitting idly on a bank; and he said to himself: “Here is one whom I will
make captive to my spear.” With that he smote his steed upon the flank,
and set his spear in rest and charged. The man, when he saw him coming
on, fell flat on the ground for fear, and cried for mercy, holding up
his hands. At this Bragadocchio took a wonderful conceit of his own
strength and courage: “Who are you, caitiff?” he cried. “You are not
worthy to breathe the air along with honest men. Prepare for death, or
yield yourself to be my prisoner for ever. ’Tis no small favour that I
give you time to answer!”

The man cried: “Hold your death-dealing hand, my lord, I am your
thrall!”

“So be it,” said the sham knight, “your fate has baulked my will, and
given you life when I had purposed death. So be it; life I give you.
Fall on the ground, and kiss my stirrup. So pay your homage.”

Then the wretch threw himself on the ground, and kissed the stirrup, and
declared himself to be Bragadocchio’s man. For a while he held his
master in great respect, but when he found out how hollow was his show
of courage, then he grew bolder, and practised upon him for his own
ends. Trompart was his name, which, being interpreted, means deceiver; a
worthy squire he was for such a knight.

They had not long companied together when they chanced to meet
Archimage, who was looking out for some men-at-arms to help him in his
evil designs. He, coming close to Trompart, said to him under his
breath: “Who is this mighty warrior, who has a spear only and no sword?”

Said Trompart: “He is indeed a mighty warrior; as for his sword, he has
made a vow that he will use none till he shall be avenged for a certain
wrong that has been done to him. Meanwhile his spear is enough: he can
do to death with that as many as he will.” Then Archimage, louting low
before him, told a false tale about the Red-Cross Knight and Sir Guyon,
which when Bragadocchio had heard, he cried with a loud voice: “Old man,
tell me where these false knights are hiding themselves. I will soon
punish them for all their misdeeds.”

“That will I do without delay,” answered Archimage, “and will help you
also when you come to deal with them. Meanwhile I would give you this
counsel, that you give no odds to your adversaries, but provide yourself
with a sword before you do battle with them, for, indeed, they are
sturdy fighters.”

“Old man,” said Bragadocchio, “you dote. Doubtless your wits have failed
you by reason of age, or you would not judge of a man by his coat of
mail or his sword. A man, be he indeed a man, can quell a host without
sword or shield. Little do you know what this right hand of mine has
achieved; but they who have seen it can tell if they will.”

Not a little abashed was Archimage at these high words; well he knew in
his heart that whoso should do battle with the Red-Cross Knight or Sir
Guyon would need all his arms, and yet he feared to offend this knight.
Then Bragadocchio said further: “Once upon a time I slew seven knights
with one sword. And I took a great oath, having done this, never again
to use a sword in battle, unless it should be the sword of the very
noblest knight in all the world.”

“Wait you for that,” said Archimage, “then you shall have it by
to-morrow at this time. ’Tis the sword of Prince Arthur, and it flames
like a burning fire. Lo! I go to fetch it.” And as he spoke he vanished
into air.

“What is this?” thought the two to themselves in sore dismay, for they
liked little to have aught to do with such a sword. And they fled from
the place as fast as they could to hide themselves in a wood which was
near at hand. This they had scarcely reached when they heard the clear
ringing of a horn. Thereupon Bragadocchio leapt from his horse and hid
his coward head in a thicket. As for Trompart, he was not easily moved,
but abode in his place to see what should happen. Soon there came into
the glade where they were a very fair lady dressed in huntress fashion.
She had a fair white tunic with an edge of gold and gilded buskins, and
a boar-spear in her hand, and on her shoulder a bow and a quiver filled
with steel-headed arrows. And all about them flowed loosely down her
golden hair. When she spied Trompart she said: “Saw you a hind with an
arrow in her right haunch? If so, tell me which way she went, that I may
follow up the chase.” But while she was speaking, she saw the bush stir
in which Bragadocchio lay hid, and thinking it was some beast of prey,
would have shot an arrow into it.

But Trompart cried: “Forbear, I pray you, whether you be nymph or mortal
maid. That is no mark for your arrows. My master, a famous knight, rests
awhile under the shade.” So she stayed her hand, and Bragadocchio came
forth from his hiding-place on his hands and knees, and after stood up,
making as if he had been newly roused from sleep. After this they talked
awhile, and when the lady had passed on, Bragadocchio said to Trompart:
“I had from my birth this grace, not to fear any mortal thing. But of
the heavenly powers and of the fiends in hell I do stand, I do honestly
confess, in great dread. And when I heard that horn, I took it for some
signal from the sky, and hid myself for fear. And now let us depart
hence.”

Such was Bragadocchio, the false knight who came upon the son of the
witch woman as he was walking in the wood with the false Florimell. When
he saw the two, and perceived that the lady was very fair to look upon,
and that he who was with her was no man of war, he rode up, with his
spear in rest, crying, “Clown, how is this? This lady is my love.
Gainsay it if you dare!”

The churl dare not answer him a word, but yielded the damsel to him; and
he, mounting her upon Trompart’s horse, rode on, not a little proud of
the valiant deed which he had done. Nor had he ridden long when there
came in view a stranger knight, who cried: “Ho there! Yield the damsel
to me; I have a better right than you!”

Sorely dismayed was Bragadocchio at such a challenge, but dissembled his
fear, saying, “Think you, Sir Knight, to steal away with words what I
have won by many blows? Yet, if you will have trial of my strength or
prove your own, let it be so.”

“Turn your horse,” said the stranger, “or I will strike you dead!”

“So be it,” answered Bragadocchio, “if nothing else will content you.
Let us then retire our horses for a furlong either way, and tilt
together as is the custom.” So they turned their horses, and retired
each a furlong’s length; but Bragadocchio came not again, but fled away
as fast as his horse could carry him.




                             CHAPTER XXIII
                       SIR SATYRANE’S TOURNAMENT


By sundry adventures, which there is no need to set forth in their
place, the girdle of Florimell came into the possession of Sir Satyrane,
who forthwith resolved to hold in honour of it a great tournament. In
this same tournament there should be, so he proclaimed, two contests;
first, a contest of knights, who should joust with each other, so
showing who excelled in strength and courage; second, a contest of fair
ladies, she who should most fittingly wear the said girdle being
adjudged the most excellent.

The beginning of the tournament was that Sir Satyrane came forth from
his pavilion, holding in his hands an ark of gold. This ark he opened
with much solemnity, and drew forth from it the girdle. A wondrously
fair thing it was, curiously embossed with pearls and precious stones;
they were all costly things, but the workmanship was costlier yet. This
he held up for the general view; and all eyes were drawn to it, for
indeed it was a thing greatly to be admired; nor was there one in all
that company but said in his heart: “Happy the knight who shall win so
fair a prize! Happy the dame who shall be deemed to wear it most
fittingly.”

The girdle having been thus displayed in the sight of all the concourse,
the knights disposed themselves for the jousting. And first of all Sir
Satyrane came forth holding in his hand the great spear which he was
wont to wield; no man in those days bore one greater, or, indeed, so
great. He was the challenger, and it became him thus to be first in the
field. Behind him were ranged the knights of Fairyland, owning
allegiance, all of them, to the great Queen Gloriana. On the other side
was ranged a great company of knights, who had come from all parts.
First of these rode up a pagan knight, Sir Bruncheval, surnamed the Bold
(he jousted with Sir Satyrane), whose mastery of arms had been tried in
many battles. Fierce was their onset, so fierce that neither could
resist the other; but both were tumbled on the plain, holding, indeed,
their spears in their hands, but not able to move them so much as a
hair’s-breadth. When Sir Ferramont saw his leader in this plight, he set
spurs to his horse, and rode forth. Against him came out Sir Blandamour,
putting all his strength into his stroke; but his strength availed him
nothing, for he was tumbled on the ground, he and his horse together.
And when Sir Paridell rode forth to his rescue, he fared no better. The
next in turn to contend was Bragadocchio, but the thing was not to his
liking, and he stood still in doubt what he should do, or rather in
fear. Thereupon Sir Triamond, vexed indeed that a brave-seeming knight
should bear himself so basely, but rejoicing in the occasion, rode forth
with his spear in rest, and charged on Sir Ferramont with all his might.
So sure was the stroke, that both man and horse were laid prostrate on
the ground, nor could they lift themselves again for a space. And when
Sir Devon rode forth from the Fairyland array he fared no better; nor
did Sir Douglas, nor Sir Palimord, when in turn they made trial of him.
Either they were stretched on the plain or went sorely wounded.

By this time Sir Satyrane had woke out of the swoon in which he had lain
so long. Looking round, he was sorely dismayed to see the havoc which
Sir Triamond had wrought among the knights of Queen Gloriana. “Truly,”
he said to himself, “I had rather been dead than laid here helpless
while such deeds were done.” Then, gathering strength, he laid hold of
his spear, which lay close beside him; his horse also, by good fortune,
was at hand. Mounting, therefore, he rode forth again to where the brave
Triamond was carrying all before him. Not a man could stand up against
him, so heavy were his strokes, so deadly was his hand. But now there
came a stay to his achievements; Sir Satyrane smote him on the side with
his great spear, and the point made a most grievous wound. So grievous
was it, that though he was not forthwith overthrown, he was fain to
withdraw himself from the field. Then the challengers ranged over the
lists, claiming to be conquerors, and, indeed, no one was ready to take
them in hand. And now the night fell, and the trumpets sounded a
retreat. That day, therefore, Sir Satyrane was adjudged to have won the
prize.

On the second day of the tournament Sir Satyrane rode forth, with Queen
Gloriana’s knights following him, to challenge all comers. And on the
other side also were many famous warriors, eager all of them to win the
prize for himself. But Sir Triamond was not one of these; his wound was
so grievous that it hindered him from making a trial of arms. So he was
constrained to stand aside, but it grieved him sorely. This his close
friend Sir Cambell perceiving, said to himself: “I cannot cure his hurt,
nor undo the thing which has been done; but this I can do; I can win
honour for him.” Therefore he took Sir Triamond’s arms, none knowing,
neither Sir Triamond himself, nor anyone else, for he said to himself:
“If I fare ill in this matter, the blame will not fall on my friend.”

He went therefore to fight, no one doubting that he was the veritable
Triamond. When he was come, he found Sir Satyrane, full of joy and
triumph, for no one was able to stand up against him. At him, therefore,
he charged, with his spear in rest; nor did Sir Satyrane, on his part,
draw back from the encounter. With so great a shock did they meet that
both were driven from their saddles to the ground. Rising, therefore,
they drew both of them their swords, and fought therewith such a fight
as had scarce been seen before in that land. And now Sir Satyrane’s
horse, for, by this time, they had both again mounted their steeds,
chanced to stumble, so that his rider was well-nigh cast to the ground.
This Sir Cambell perceiving, was not slow to seize the occasion, but
dealt him so sore a blow on the crest of his helmet that he fell to the
ground. Then Sir Cambell leapt from his steed, and would have spoiled
him of his arms. But this, which, indeed, is a custom of the battlefield
rather than of the tourney, the knights who were of Sir Satyrane’s party
would not suffer. Hastening to their comrade’s help, they closed his
adversary in so close a ring that though he laid about him most bravely,
yet could he not deliver himself—for what could one against so many? So
he was taken prisoner and led away.

It chanced somehow that the news of what had befallen Sir Cambell came
to Sir Triamond where he lay in his bed. In a moment of time he leapt
therefrom, wholly forgetting his wound, and sought for his armour. He
sought, but he found it not, for indeed, Cambell was wearing it at the
very time. But the arms and armour of Sir Cambell he found. These he
donned without delay, and issued forth to take such chance as might
befall him. There he saw his friend and companion Cambell as he was led
away captive in the midst of a great press of knights, and the sight
moved him to great wrath. He thrust himself into the thickest of the
press, and smote down all that were in his way till he came to where
Cambell was led a prisoner between two knights. Fiercely did he assail
these two, and they, for their own lives’ sake, were constrained to let
him go. Then he, seizing a sword from one of them, laid about him with
all his might, for both his own wrong and the wounding of his friend
stirred a great wrath in him. So these two made great havoc over all the
field, till the trumpet sounded the end of the battle for that day. By
common consent the prize of the day was adjudged to these two, Cambell
and Triamond, but to which of the two was doubtful, for they strove
together, each advancing the other’s cause, so that the matter was
postponed.

On the third and last day of the tournament many valiant deeds were
done, not without great hurt and damage to many that contended in the
field. There might be seen that day full many a shivered shield, and
swords strewn upon the ground, horses also running loose without their
riders, and squires helping their lords who were in evil plight. But,
for the most part, the knights of the Queen fared the better, and among
the knights there was not one that fought with better success than the
brave Sir Satyrane. Now and again his fortune failed him; but ever it
returned again, and he was the best stay and support of his side.

But when it was now past noon, there came forth from the other side a
strange knight whom no one knew. Strange he was and strange was his
disguise, for all his armour was covered with moss from the wood, and
his horse had trappings of oak leaves, and on his shield, which had
ragged edges, was written this motto: _Salvagesse sans Finesse_. He, as
soon as he had come upon the field, charged the first knight that was in
his way. This was the stout Sir Sanglier, a valiant man, well approved
in many battles; but now he was laid low at the very first encounter.
And after him Sir Brianor came to a worse fate, for he was killed
outright. Seven knights, one after the other, he overthrew; and when his
spear was broken, then he worked no less damage with his sword. Shields
and helmets he broke through, and wasted all the array of knights, as a
lion wastes a flock of sheep. So Satyrane and his party were turned to
flight, for, indeed, no man could stand before him. And when they would
find out his name, no one knew it, so that they were constrained to call
him the Savage Knight. But he was in truth Sir Artegall.

It was said by a wise man of old time that no man should be accounted
happy before the end, because it cannot be known what change of fortune
may befall him. And so it proved that day with Sir Artegall. For when
the sun was laid low in the heavens, but before the trumpet had sounded,
there came forth from the ranks of the Queen’s knights a stranger. First
he charged at Sir Artegall and tumbled him backwards over his horse’s
tail, with so heavy a fall that he had small desire to rise again. This
when Sir Cambell saw he charged with all his might; and he, too, could
be seen lying on the plain. In like manner fared Sir Triamond when he
would have avenged his friend’s disgrace. Nor did Sir Blandamour succeed
where these had failed. Many another famous knight was overthrown that
day, yet without loss of honour, for they had to yield to the enchanted
spear of Britomart. So when the trumpet sounded on the third day of Sir
Satyrane’s great tournament, the honour rested with the knights of Queen
Gloriana.




                              CHAPTER XXIV
                         OF FLORIMELL’S GIRDLE


The tournament being ended, the next thing in order to be done was to
adjudge the prizes. For the first day the prize was given to Sir
Satyrane, as has been told before, because, having been first at the
beginning, he was also first at the end. For the second day Sir Triamond
was held to have excelled all others: Cambell, indeed, was victor, but
then Triamond had saved him from imprisonment, and he who saves the
victor is, without controversy, first of all. For the third day the
prize was adjudged to Britomart, or, as men called her, the Knight of
the Ebony Spear, for who she was in truth no one knew. Nor could this
judgment be disputed, for, whereas the Savage Knight had overthrown all
others, so was he overthrown by her. And this third prize was held to be
the most honourable of all, and the knight to whom it was given the
first of all. And because by good right beauty and valour go together,
there must needs be a trial of the dames, who should be reckoned the
fairest, with the girdle of Florimell for prize.

First came Sir Cambell, leading his wife, the fair Cambina, clad in a
veil which covered her from head to foot, which being taken away, such
was her beauty that all hearts were won. Nevertheless, when Sir
Triamond, coming next, showed his wife Canacé, they were not less moved
by the sight. And some greatly admired the false Duessa, when Sir
Paridell led her forth before the company, for some hearts are moved by
one thing and some by another. Nor did the Lady Lucida, whose champion
was Sir Ferramont, want for worshippers; nor, indeed, did any one of the
hundred dames assembled in that place, lack some to champion her. Yet,
doubtless, the great number of the votes had been given to Amoret, when
Britomart led her forth, but that she also was surpassed in the common
judgment by Sir Blandamour’s Florimell, not the true Florimell, it must
be understood, but the false which the witch woman had made. For in
comparison of her all others seemed but base, even as the stars seem to
grow dull when the moon is shining at her full. “This,” said they all,
“is no mortal creature, but an angel from heaven.”

Even so when some cunning smith overlays base metal with covering of
gold, he lays upon it so fair a gloss that it seems to surpass the true
gold itself. So they who had looked upon the true Florimell thought to
themselves, “The dame is fairer than ever before!” For ever it is that
false things do seem to excel the true, so weak and false are the
judgments of men.

Then, by common consent, the girdle was adjudged to her as being the
fairest of all; but lo! when they thought to bind it round her waist,
they could not prevail to do it. So soon as they fastened it, it seemed
to loose itself and fall away, as if there was some secret hindrance and
want of fitness. And so it fared with many other dames when they assayed
the same; when they would have girt the thing about their waists, they
could not. However fast it seemed to be, it was soon seen to be loose.
Then a certain squire, who thought scorn of women, cried aloud: “Surely
this is a sorrowful sight, that out of so many fair dames not one can
fit to herself the girdle of beauty! Shame on the man who thought of
this fatal device! May he never find fair lady to love him!” At which
saying all the knights laughed loud, and all the ladies frowned.

And now the gentle Amoret, coming last of all that company, took the
girdle in her hands, and put it around her waist, and lo! it fitted to a
marvel. But the false Florimell snatched it away as if in anger, and
would have clasped it round her own waist. She clasped it, but it fitted
as ill as before. Nevertheless it was adjudged to her as her right, for
such the common voice had been; and she herself was assigned to the
Knight of the Ebony Spear, that is, to Britomart. But she was
ill-content: “Nay, nay,” she said, all thinking that it was the Knight
of the Ebony Spear that spoke, “I am no light of love; I am still
steadfast to my own Amoret.” Then she was adjudged to the Savage Knight,
but he had already departed in great wrath; and then to Triamond, but he
was faithful to his Canacé; and after Triamond to Sir Satyrane. He
indeed was well content. But then arose great strife, and, like enough,
there had been a drawing of swords, but for this strange happening. Sir
Satyrane stood forth and said:

“Surely we have had enough of battles; why should we fight again the old
quarrels? Let the fair lady choose for herself. Surely the love that
comes of her will is the sweetest of all!” To this they all consented.
And so the choice was given to the false Florimell. Long looked she upon
each gallant knight, for it seemed as if she would willingly have
pleased them all; but at the last she turned to Bragadocchio, for he
also stood among the rest, and said:

“This is the man I choose!” Great was the wrath of all the company of
knights, for they knew not how fitting it was that the false beauty
should choose the valour that was false.




                              CHAPTER XXV
                       OF BRITOMART AND ARTEGALL


Britomart grew not a little weary of these strivings of knights and
dames. Therefore she departed, taking with her the Lady Amoret, for she
was still bent on finding the Knight of the Mirror. An unlucky maid she
was, in truth, thus seeking one who had been her adversary, to whom she
had been so near, though she knew it not. Great was her grief, and great
also her toil, for neither grief nor toil did she spare, thinking that
could she find him, there would be both an end of her own toil and a
solace for her grief. The gentle Amoret also, who was her companion, had
a sorrow of her own, for she sought for her Scudamore; but he, unhappy
man, had his heart full of hatred and revenge. For that evil hag, whose
name was Até or Strife, had poisoned it with suspicion. The very one who
had best served him, he hated most, even Britomart. Neither could
Glaucé, for she went with him, serving him as a squire, abate his rage,
for all that she could say.

And now, as though the evil counsels of Strife had not wrought trouble
enough for him, he must needs put another burden on his soul. As they
journeyed on, the night came upon them unawares, very heavy with cloud
and rain. They, seeking some place where they might find shelter,
perceived upon a steep hillside what seemed to be a poor man’s cottage.
And underneath there ran a little stream, but the water was muddy and
thick, and had an evil smell. As they came near they heard the sound of
hammers, and judged that it must be a blacksmith’s forge. Entering in,
they found the goodman of the place busy with his work. He was of a mean
and wretched aspect, spent, it would seem, with weariness. His eyes were
hollow, and his cheeks fallen in, like to one who had been many months
in a prison cell; his face was begrimed with smoke and his beard ragged,
as if neither comb nor shears had ever passed upon it. Rude were his
garments, and hanging in rags, and his hands were blistered with
burning, with nails long left unpared. Care was his name, and his trade
was the working of wedges of iron. To what purpose they could serve,
neither he nor anyone knew. Such are the idle doubts and fears which
Care drives into the hearts of men. Nor was it he alone that was busy
with this toil; six stout workers stood about the forge, all with huge
hammers in their hands, which they plied in order. Much did Sir
Scudamore wonder to see their work; but when he had watched it awhile,
he asked them of its purpose, saying, “What make you?” But they answered
not a word, nor did they hold their hands for a moment; the bellows blew
like to a cold blast from the north, and the din of the hammers ceased
not.

When the knight saw that no one answered, he laid himself down upon the
floor, seeking to rest his weary limbs; Glaucé did the like; and sore
was her need of rest, for she was old and feeble, and they had journeyed
that day a long and weary way. She slept indeed, but to Sir Scudamore
there came no sleeping. Now he would lie on this side, now on that; now
he lay in one place, now in another. Anon he would rise from his place,
and then lie down again. But every change was to no purpose, and every
place seemed full of pain. Also the dogs howled and barked all the night
long, and the cocks crowed, and the owls hooted; and if by chance
slumber came down upon his eyes, then one of the workers smote his
headpiece with a hammer, for they indeed rested not all the night. As
morning drew near, he fell into a sleep, so utterly wearied was he, but
sleep was worse than waking, for it brought evil thoughts of those whom
he was most bound to love and trust.

The next day Sir Scudamore and Glaucé, serving him as his squire,
started betimes from the house of Care, for his was the dwelling where
they had spent the night. After a while they espied a knight sitting
beside a wood, while his horse grazed in the field hard by. The man
mounted, so soon as he saw them, and rode forward, as did also Sir
Scudamore. But when the two were near enough that each could discern
what arms the other wore, the Knight of the Wood lowered his spear and
turned his horse aside, saying, “Gentle Scudamore, pardon me, I pray
you, that I had unknowingly almost trespassed against you!”

“I blame you not,” answered Sir Scudamore; “such happenings may well be
to knights who seek for adventures. But, sir, as you call me by my name,
may I be bold enough to ask you yours?”

The other made answer: “I pray you pardon me if I withhold my name for a
time; the time serves not that I should make it known. May it please you
to call me the _Savage Knight_, for thus I am commonly known.”

Sir Scudamore said: “This place seems to suit well the arms which you
are pleased to wear. But tell me, have you any special purpose to serve
that you abide in this place?”

“Sir,” replied the other, “be it known to you that a stranger knight did
me but the other day a great shame and dishonour, and I wait till I can
take vengeance on him.”

“Tell me,” answered Sir Scudamore, “who it is that wronged you.”

“His name,” said the Savage Knight, “is unknown, yet he himself is known
to many, especially by the ebony spear which he carries. It was but the
other day that with this spear he overthrew all that met him in the
tourney, and reft from me the honour of the day; not only so, for of
these things a knight may not complain, but he took from me the fairest
lady that ever was, and withholds her still.”

Then Sir Scudamore knew that he spoke of Britomart, who, as he thought,
had taken from him his love. All his heart was full of rage, and he
cried out: “Now, by my head, this is not the first time of this knight’s
playing an unknightly part, for I know him by this same spear which he
bears. From me also did he carry away my love. If you purpose to take
vengeance on him, I will give you all the help that I can.” So these two
agreed to join together in wreaking their wrath on the Knight of the
Ebony Spear, that is to say, on Britomart.

While they were communing together on this matter, they saw in the
distance a knight riding slowly towards them, somewhat strangely
attired, and bearing strange arms, whom approaching they perceived to be
the very one of whom they were speaking.

Then said Sir Scudamore: “I beseech you, Sir Savage Knight, that as I
was first wronged, so I may first take vengeance. And if I fail, then
the lot comes to you.”

[Illustration: Sir Scudamore overthrown by Britomart.]

To this the other gave his assent. Thereupon Sir Scudamore charged at
her with all his might and at his horse’s top speed, which she
perceiving, made herself ready, and gave him so rough a welcome that she
smote to the ground both horse and man; and this so strongly, that
neither had any mind to rise therefrom. This Sir Artegall perceiving,
felt in himself a yet greater anger than before, and laying his lance in
rest, charged also with all his strength. But he also was laid upon the
ground, for there was nothing that could withstand the enchanted spear.
Nevertheless he fared better than his fellow, in that he rose lightly
from the ground, and drawing his sword, leapt fiercely at his adversary.
So sore were his strokes, that though she was on horseback, she was
constrained to give place before him. As they turned this way and that,
it chanced that a blow which Sir Artegall aimed at the Princess,
glancing down the corslet which she wore, lighted on the back of her
horse, wounding him so sorely upon the back, in the rear of the saddle,
that she was compelled to alight. Not a whit was she dismayed at this
mischance, and casting down her enchanted spear, betook herself to use
sword and shield. And now the fortune of the fight changed somewhat, for
he was not a little spent by long fighting on foot, and she, having been
mounted hitherto, had the advantage. Hence it followed that she drove
him backwards, and even, so heavy were her blows, wounded him through
his coat of mail. And now behold! another change. She was over-hasty in
her assault, and her breath began to fail; and he on the other hand
reserved his strength, and dealt his blows as thick as the hailstones
fall upon a roof—unhappy man, who came so near to slaying the fairest
creature in all the world! Still was the battle waged between these two,
but ever Sir Artegall grew the stronger and Britomart the weaker. At
last he dealt a stroke that, had it been aimed aright, had surely gone
near to slay her; but, by good chance, it did but shear away the visor
of her helmet, so that her face could plainly be seen, somewhat reddened
indeed by long toil, and with the sweat standing on it in great drops,
but yet fair beyond all comparison. And at the same time her hair, its
band being broken, fell down as it were a river of gold flowing about
her. Already had the knight lifted his hand to strike again; but when he
saw the fair face and golden hair his arm was, as it were, benumbed, his
sword dropped from his hand, and he himself fell upon his knees.

“Surely,” he said to himself, “this is some goddess that I see before
me.” She stood, indeed, in great wrath, for she had been in sore
straits, and anger ever follows close on fear, and made as if she would
strike him, but he could do nothing but ask for pardon. Nor was Sir
Scudamore less amazed, for he had by this time recovered from his swoon,
when he saw the sight.

And now Glaucé, glad at heart to see again the mistress whom she had
missed so long, drew near, and made her a reverence, saying: “Truly I
rejoice to see you safe after so many toils and dangers. And now, dear
daughter, as you love me, grant these knights a truce.”

“So be it,” Britomart made answer. Thereupon they lifted up their
visors, so that their faces could be seen. And when Britomart looked on
the face of Artegall, behold it was the very countenance of the knight
whom she had seen long since in the magic mirror! And as she saw it her
haughty spirit abated. She could never again lift hand against him; nay,
when she thought to use her tongue, and reproach him with angry words,
even her tongue failed her.

And now Sir Scudamore, greatly rejoiced to know that all his fears and
suspicions were false, drew near and said: “Surely it makes me glad, Sir
Artegall, to see you who were wont to despise all dames, bow yourself
before one in so lowly a fashion.” And when Britomart heard the name of
Artegall, her heart leaped within her breast, nor for all her feigning
could she hide the gladness which she felt. Then said Glaucé again:
“Gentle knights, be thankful for the happy chance which has brought so
strange an ending to your fears and troubles. Here is no thief that
would take away from you the ladies whom you love. And you, Sir
Artegall, who call yourself the Savage Knight, count it no shame that a
maid has so bravely held her own against you, and strive no longer
against love, which is the very crown of knighthood. And you, fair lady,
turn away your wrath; if there is fire in your heart, let it be the fire
of love.” Britomart blushed deep to hear these words, and Sir Artegall
was glad at heart.

And now Sir Scudamore, who was divided between hope and fear concerning
his Amoret, spoke, saying: “Pardon me if I ask you for tidings of my
Amoret. I know that you delivered her at no small peril from the
Enchanter’s prison. Where is she? for I would seek her, as is, indeed,
my bounden duty.”

Britomart answered: “Sir Knight, it grieves me much that I cannot tell
you what you seek to know. After I had delivered her from the Enchanter,
as you know, I kept her safe. And truly there never was companion more
dear to me than she. But one day, as we travelled, we lighted from our
steeds by the wayside, to rest awhile. Then I laid myself down to sleep;
but when I woke from my sleep, she was nowhere to be seen. I called her;
I sought her far and near; but nowhere could I find her, or hear tidings
of her.”

When Sir Scudamore heard these words, he was greatly troubled, and stood
like to a man who has received a mortal blow. But Glaucé said: “Be not
discouraged, fair sir; hope still for the best; why should you trouble
yourself in vain?”

Little comfort did he take of these words, but when Britomart said,
“Truly you have great cause for trouble; yet take comfort, by the light
of day I swear that I will never leave you till I find and give her back
to you,” then was he not a little comforted, for he had a great trust
that what Britomart promised she would surely perform.

Then they all journeyed together to a castle that was near, Sir Artegall
being their guide. There they rested till their wounds were healed and
their strength repaired. Meanwhile Sir Artegall paid court to Britomart,
who, after much persuasion, though, indeed, she was not unwilling in her
heart, consented to take him for her husband. Nevertheless their
marriage could not be yet, because Sir Artegall was bound on a great
adventure which he must needs carry through. Nor could she refuse to
allow him to depart, seeing that his honour was bound in the matter.
Only it was agreed that when three months had waxed and waned, then he
should return. So the knight departed, Britomart going with him for a
part of his journey. Full loath was she to leave him, finding ever new
occasions for delay. And when these were all spent, then with a heavy
heart did she return to the castle, for she also had business in hand,
even to seek together with Sir Scudamore for the lost Amoret.




                              CHAPTER XXVI
                       OF THE FORTUNES OF AMORET


It shall now be told how the fair Amoret was lost. She and Britomart,
riding away from the place where Sir Satyrane had held his tournament,
chanced in their journey upon a wood. There it seemed good to them to
rest awhile. Britomart, being not a little wearied with fighting in the
lists, fell fast asleep, but Amoret walked in the wood. As she walked a
giant rushed out of a thicket hard by and seized her; she cried aloud;
but Britomart heard her not, so deep was she in slumber. A horrible
monster to behold he was, feeding on the raw flesh of men and beasts,
with a face red as blood, and two great ears, like to the ears of an
elephant. He was covered with shaggy hair, and in his hand a young oak
with sharp snags that had been hardened in the fire, till they were as
steel. He carried her through the wood to his cave, and threw her in.
For a while she lay without sense; then, being somewhat recovered, she
heard someone sighing and sobbing, and inquired who it was that spoke.

Then that other said: “Listen, unhappy one, and I will tell you my
story, from which you may learn in what plight you yourself are. Twenty
days have I dwelt in this dreadful place; and in these twenty days have
I seen seven women slain and devoured. And now he has for store three
only, yourself and me and an old woman yonder; and of these three he
will surely devour one to-morrow. And if you ask my history it is this.
I am daughter to a lord of high degree, and it happened to me to love a
squire of low degree. Of low degree he was, but so comely as to be a fit
mate for the proudest lady in the land. Nevertheless, my father, loving
me well after his fashion, and seeking my advancement, would have none
of him. But I, being steadfast in my mind, made a resolve to flee far
from my home, and take with my lover such a lot as fortune might bring.
On a certain day, therefore, it was appointed that I should meet him at
a certain place. To which place I came, but he, alas! was not there.
Then this monster found me, and carried me away as an eagle carries off
a dove.”

After they had talked awhile, lo! the monster himself came back to his
cave. And Amoret, as soon as she saw him, leapt from her place, which
chanced to be near to the mouth of the cave, and fled away on her feet
as fast as she could; and the monster, perceiving her flight, pursued
her. Fleet of foot was she, but it had fared ill with her but for a
happy chance which brought her help beyond all hope, as shall now be
told.

There dwelt in those parts a famous huntress, Belphœbe by name; this
Belphœbe was own sister to Amoret. That day she was following the chase,
pursuing leopards and bears, of which beasts there was a great multitude
in those woods. With her were her companions, the forest nymphs, and
also a gentle squire, who was her lover. Now the squire chanced to be
separated from the rest of his company, and so came to the very place
where the monster was in chase of Amoret. By this time he had overtaken
her and caught her up in his arms. And when the squire perceived it, and
set upon him, seeking to deliver her out of his hands, the villain used
this crafty device. When the squire would have thrust at him with the
hunting-spear which he carried, then the monster would shield himself
with the body of Amoret. And when the squire held back his blow, or when
the blow chanced to fall ever so lightly on the dame, then the monster
laughed aloud. So they two contended awhile; but at the last the squire
dealt his adversary a shrewd blow and wounded him sorely. But this did
not abate his rage, for, throwing Amoret on the ground, he set upon the
squire so fiercely with his club, that the man had much ado to save
himself from being beaten down. Nor can it be known what had been the
issue, for now Belphœbe, hearing the sound of the strokes through the
wood, and guided by her ear, drew near, holding her bow in her hand,
with an arrow upon the string, ready to be despatched. When the monster
saw her, he, knowing how deadly was her aim, turned and fled. Nor did
she fail to pursue; swift of foot was she, and ere he could reach his
cave, she smote him on the back of the neck with an arrow. He fell to
the ground with a great crash, and when she came up, thinking to put an
end to him, lo! he was already dead. Thereupon she went into the cave,
and while she wondered that a place could be so foul, she heard a
whispering and a low sort of groaning. Then she said to herself: “Are
these spirits that suffer in this place of dread and darkness?” and
afterwards aloud, “If there be any here, let them come forth, if only
they be free to move.” Thereupon Æmilia stood up from the place where
she had been lying, and told her story. “Come forth,” said Belphœbe,
when she heard the tale; “haply, I may give you help.” So she led her to
the place where she had left the squire and the fair Amoret. And now
there befell an evil chance which brought about no small trouble.

Amoret was in a piteous plight, as may easily be believed. For first she
had been affrighted almost to death by the monster, and then she had
been sorely bruised when he cast her so roughly to the ground. So she
lay as one without life, and the gentle squire was full of compassion
when he saw her hurts, especially the wound which he himself had made
with his hunting-spear, when the monster held her before him as a
shield. And now Belphœbe, coming back from the cave, saw him looking at
her, as it might be, in lover’s fashion, and a great pang of jealousy
and anger moved in her heart. At first she thought to slay them both
with the arrow which she held in her hand. But keeping herself back from
this, she cried: “Is this, then, the faith you keep?” And, with the
word, she turned her face and fled into the wood. The squire, knowing
that he was wrongly blamed, made haste to follow her, yet, overtaking
her, he did not dare to come near; and when he would have told her the
truth, she would not listen, but made as if she would slay him with an
arrow. So, after having long followed her in vain, he turned back, and
finding a solitary place in the depth of a forest, made there a cabin
for himself, where he dwelt in most unhappy sort. His weapons of war he
broke, and vowed never to use them again. Also he swore a great oath
that he would never more speak to woman; his garments, which were of the
seemliest fashion, he cut into the strangest shape, and his hair he
suffered to grow as it would and fall untrimmed about his shoulders. So
he lived for many days.

It chanced one day that a turtle dove which also had lost its mate came
near, and, as if it could understand what was in his heart, behaved in a
most friendly and familiar fashion. And this it did again and again. The
bird would sit upon the branch of a tree hard by, and sing to him; and
he, by way of guerdon for its song, would share with him such slender
meals as he had. On a certain day he brought out from a certain place
certain gifts which Belphœbe had bestowed upon him in the days when the
affection between them was yet unbroken. Among these was a ruby of the
finest water, with a gold setting in the shape of a heart and a chain of
gold fastened to the setting. This jewel he took, and binding it with a
riband of his lady’s colour, tied it round the neck of the dove, and
solaced his mind by gazing on it. But no sooner had the bird felt the
jewel tied about his neck than he spread out his wings and flew away.
Not a little troubled was he at this matter, for he had lost, not the
companionship of the bird only, but the jewel also. So was his trouble
not a little increased. But the bird flew in a straight line to the
abode of Belphœbe, and found her sitting in an arbour, taking rest from
the toils of the chase. For she still followed in the ways of a
huntress, though, in truth, she was not a little troubled that she had
lost her lover. So soon as she saw the bird, she spied the jewel about
his neck, and knew it for her own gift, and the riband also wherewith it
was bound. Thereupon she rose from her place, and would have caught it
in her hand, but the bird flew away. For a short space it flew, and then
tarried for a space, and then when Belphœbe came near, flew away once
more. So it drew the lady on from place to place, ever seeming ready to
be caught, yet ever again escaping, till it brought her to the place
where the squire dwelt in his unhappiness. There it perched on his hand,
and sang a song, sweet and sad, as if to suit his sorrowful estate. So
spent was he with grief and trouble that the lady knew him not, but only
saw that he was in great misery, yet judged that he had fallen into it
from better things. Thereupon she said: “Unhappy man, what has brought
you into this evil plight? If it is Heaven’s will, then we must submit;
but if it is of man’s wrongdoing, then may the wrong be set right. But
if it is of your own will, know that no man should so neglect the gifts
of God, who wills that all should be happy.”

“O lady,” answered the squire, “surely it is no one but yourself that
has brought me into this trouble.” And he showed her the whole truth.

So peace was made again between the two.




                             CHAPTER XXVII
                OF SIR ARTEGALL AND THE KNIGHT SANGLIER


It is now time that the story of Sir Artegall should be told; how he was
bred up in the ways of justice. Now this story, as it was commonly
reported, was this: Astræa, who was the Goddess of Justice, found him
when he was a child playing with other children of a like age; she,
liking him well, and finding him innocent and without guile, took him
away with her to a solitary place where she dwelt—for as yet she lived
upon the earth—and there instructed and trained him to be such an one as
she desired. She taught him to weigh right and wrong in equal scales,
and to measure out equity according to the rule of conscience. And
because there were no men in the place, she taught him to seek
experience of the right way among the beasts of the forest; for these
also oppress their own kind. Also she caused him to be instructed in the
use of arms, in which use he became in due time most expert, so that he
came to be held in high repute, as being one who could not only
distinguish most truly between right and wrong, but could also maintain
the same by force of arms. Also she gave him a sword of great repute
which Jupiter himself had used in his war against the Titans; Chrysaor
was its name, which, being interpreted, is “Sword of Gold.” Of finest
temper was it, and beautiful to behold. Also she gave her servant to
attend upon him—Talus was his name. This same Talus wielded an iron
flail with which to thresh out falsehood and separate the truth.

This Artegall, being now come to years of manhood, betook himself, as
was the wont of all worthy knights in those days, to the Court of Queen
Gloriana. And she gave him as the task which he should accomplish, the
succouring of a distressed lady, Irene by name, from whom a tyrant, whom
men called Grantorto, withheld the heritage which was rightly hers. For
she judged that there was no man who could better discern the right, and
having discerned it could more effectually cause it to prevail.

So it came to pass that he and Talus, who was his squire, rode off on
their errand. On their way they saw as sorry a sight as ever was seen by
mortal eyes, a squire sitting upon the ground in most doleful fashion,
and hard by him, lying on the ground, the headless corpse of a lady. It
was indeed a piteous thing to see the gay apparel of the dead, most
cruelly drenched in blood.

“Now tell me,” cried Sir Artegall, “by what foul mischance this dreadful
thing has happened.”

“Oh, sir,” answered the squire, “as I sat here with the lady whom I
love, there came riding by a knight who had in his company this fair
dame whom you see lying here. And whether he was taken with the sight of
my love, or was weary of his own, I know not; but this he said: ‘Ho!
fellow, let us make exchange.’ And when I denied his request, and the
two ladies also cried out upon him, then he threw down the dame his
companion on the ground, and lawlessly taking away from me my own, set
her upon his horse. And when his lady saw what he had done, and how he
was riding away, she followed him as fast as she could, and laying hold
of his arm, cried out: ‘Leave me not in this fashion; slay me rather!’
And he in a fury drew his sword, and with a single stroke shore off her
head, even in the place where now she lies. And now he has gone, taking
my love with him.”

“Tell me,” said Sir Artegall, “by which way he went. Tell me also by
what signs I may know him.”

“But, fair sir,” the squire made answer, “he has gone so long that you
can scarce hope to overtake him. Yet, if you would know the way, he rode
across the plain.” And he pointed with his hand to the course which the
knight had followed. “As for the marks, know that he carried on his
shield a broken sword on a field of blood; and, indeed, it seemed to be
a fitting emblem.”

“Follow him,” said Sir Artegall to his page Talus. And the page followed
him swift as a swallow flies over a field. Nor was it long before he
overtook the knight—Sir Sanglier he was called—and bade him come back
with him, and answer for his deed. No little scorn did the knight feel
to be so commanded, and, setting down the lady whom he carried on his
steed, rode at the page Talus with all his force. Full on the body he
struck him, but moved him no more than a rock is moved by some stone
that is thrown at it. On the other hand, Talus dealt him such a blow
that he laid him prostrate on the ground. Ere he could recover himself,
Talus had seized him in an iron grip, and forced him to follow him, the
lady also, though she would have fled in her fear, following. So they
came to Sir Artegall.

“What is this that you have done?” said Sir Artegall.

“Nay,” said the knight, “I did it not: I am guiltless of the blood of
this dame, and this I will prove on the body of this false squire, if he
will meet me hand to hand.”

Now the squire was not of such prowess as to meet so doughty a knight.
Then said Sir Artegall: “This is a doubtful cause, which it were not
well to try by arbitrament of battle. Will you therefore commit the
matter to me, and abide by my judgment and sentence?”

To this they both consented. Then said Sir Artegall: “Since each of you
denies that this lady came by her death through his deed, and each
claims the living lady as his own, my judgment is that both the living
and the dead shall be equally divided, and each shall have his part both
of one and of the other. Also I decree that if either of you two shall
reject this my sentence, he shall carry this head as a penance for
twelve months, by way of witness that he brought about her death.”

Sir Sanglier gladly accepted the doom, but the squire was ill-content,
for he really loved the dame who had been reft from him. “Nay,” said he,
“I would rather by far that she should live, though I lose her.”

“’Tis well said, squire!” cried Sir Artegall, “and now I perceive that
you are indeed guiltless in this matter. As for you, Sir Knight, who
care so little for the living or the dead, take this head and carry it
for a twelve months’ space, to be a witness of your shame and guilt.”
Sir Sanglier was ill content with this sentence, and would have refused
to abide by it. Only, when he saw Talus approaching with intent to
compel him, he made his submission, for he knew by experience how great
was his strength.

Then said the squire: “Oh, sir, you have done me such service as I can
never repay. Let me therefore attend you as your squire, and that
without fee or favour.”

“Not so,” Sir Artegall made answer, “I am well content to be as I am. Do
you follow your own affairs. As for me, Talus here will be sufficient
for my needs.”




                             CHAPTER XXVIII
                  OF OTHER ADVENTURES OF SIR ARTEGALL


As Sir Artegall, with Talus following, rode on, he met a dwarf who was
travelling with all the speed that he could use. “Stay awhile,” he said,
“for I have somewhat to ask of you.” And the dwarf, though somewhat
loath, could not but yield. Now the dwarf’s name was Dony, and he served
the fair Florimell. Not a little of his discourse, therefore, concerned
the said Florimell. He told how Marinell was recovered of the grievous
wound which Britomart had given him, and how he was to wed the fair
Florimell.

“Say you so?” cried Artegall. “Tell me, therefore, when the marriage
shall be, for I would fain be present at the celebration.”

“In three days’ time, as I am informed,” answered the dwarf, “and I too
should be there, and the place is the castle by the seashore; only there
is a hindrance in the way, for a little farther on from this place, a
cruel Saracen keeps the bridge by which one must needs pass. Much harm
has he done already to travellers, and men are fain to shun the way that
lies thereby.”

“Tell me more about the villain,” said Sir Artegall. Then Dony set forth
the whole matter.

“He is a man of great strength, and expert in battle. Moreover, he is
not a little helped by the charms with which the wicked witch, his
daughter, supports him. Thus he has gathered together much wealth, store
of gold, and lordships and farms. This wealth he daily increases,
greatly by means of this same bridge which he holds by force of arms. No
one will he suffer to go over unless he first pays a toll, be he rich or
poor. If the traveller be poor, then a squire whom he sets over this
business extorts from him this tribute. As for the richer sort, these he
deals with himself. Men call him Pollenté, which, being interpreted, is
‘Powerful,’ and the name is fitting, for much power he has. And besides
the power he has not a little cunning, for he is wont to fight on this
same bridge. Exceeding long is it and narrow, and full of pitfalls which
he knows, but a stranger knows not. And often it happens that the
stranger falls through one of these said pitfalls into the river
beneath. And while he is confused with his fall, Pollenté leaps into the
river and takes him at a disadvantage, and either slays him outright or
causes him to drown. Then he takes the spoils of them who perish in this
fashion, and brings them to his daughter, who dwells hard by. Thus she
has gathered together great store of wealth, so that she exceeds even
kings. Her they call Munera. Very fair is she, and gorgeously attired;
many lords have sought to have her for a wife, but in her pride she
thinks scorn of them all.”

This is the story which Dony the dwarf told to Sir Artegall. When the
knight heard it, he cried, “Now, by my life, I will go none other way
but this, God helping me.”

So he went on with Talus, and the dwarf followed. When they came to the
bridge, there came to them an evil-looking villain, who said, “Give me
the passage-money, according to the custom of the place!”

“Here,” answered Sir Artegall, “is my passage-money,” and therewith
dealt him such a blow that he fell dead upon the ground. When the
Saracen knight saw this, he was very wrath, and charged at Sir Artegall
full tilt; nor did Sir Artegall lag behind. They met in the middle of
the bridge, where there was a trap cunningly devised. The Saracen looked
that his adversary should fall into it unawares and be sorely bruised
and wounded; but Sir Artegall, having been forewarned by the dwarf,
leapt into the river, clear of all that might do damage to horse or man.
The Saracen leapt in like fashion, and the two met in the water, not one
whit less hotly than had they been on the dry land. And here the pagan
had no small advantage, for he was accustomed to fight in this fashion,
and his horse also could swim like a fish. Sir Artegall, perceiving that
the odds were against him, saw that he must close with his adversary
without delay. Long they wrestled together, and Sir Artegall never
loosened his grip one whit, and at last forced him from his saddle, so
that he no longer had the advantage of the swimming of his horse. And
yet the issue of the fight was doubtful awhile, for the Saracen was both
brave and expert in arms. Nevertheless Sir Artegall had the better
breath, as one that followed temperance in all things, and so prevailed
until the Saracen was compelled to turn from the river to the land,
hoping so to escape. Yet even as he lifted his head from the stream to
the brink, the knight dealt him so heavy a blow that it clean shore the
head from the neck. And this being done, then he went his way to the
castle where the pagan’s daughter dwelt.

[Illustration: Sir Artegall and the Saracen.]

Here he was denied entrance, being received with so great a shower of
stones that he was forced to retreat. Then he sent Talus, bidding him
compel an entrance. And this he did without damage to himself, and with
his iron flail he battered the door so fiercely that the whole place
shook from the foundation to the roof. All who were within were greatly
dismayed, and the Lady Munera herself came out, and stood upon the
castle wall. When she saw in what peril she was, she used all the
devices which she could imagine to deliver herself. First she besought
the adversary with many prayers to cease from his attack—and, indeed,
she was not wont to beseech in vain. Then she tried what enchantments
could do, and of these she had a great store at her command. And when
she found that prayers and enchantments availed nothing, she thought to
corrupt the man with great gifts. She caused sacks of gold and precious
things to be brought, and poured from the castle wall, thinking to
herself that he would surely cease from his battering, and give her, at
the least, some respite and delay.

But the riches moved him no more than the entreaties and enchantments.
Still he battered with his iron flail till he broke down the door and
made a way for his master to enter. No one dared to lift a hand against
them: all through the castle they moved at their will. The Lady Munera
for a while they could not find. At the last Talus, than whom a
bloodhound was not more keen to scent a runaway, found her hidden under
a heap of gold. Thence he drew her from her lair, pitying her not at
all. For now even Sir Artegall, seeing how fair she was, had some
compassion in his heart, and when she knelt before him would have given
her some remission of the penalty. But there was no such thought in the
heart of Talus. He cared for naught but to do justice to the full. So he
took her by the waist, she crying loudly the while, and cast her into
the river. And when he had wrought this justice upon her, he took all
the pelf that he found in the castle, and ground it small to powder, and
threw it into the water. This done, he razed the castle to the ground,
destroying it utterly, so that no one in days to come should think to
set it up again. After this Sir Artegall reformed the evil customs of
the bridge, ordering that in time to come it should be free for all to
pass over.

This good deed accomplished, they journeyed on to the castle by the sea,
where the nuptials of Sir Marinell and the fair Florimell were to be
celebrated with great honour. There were great feastings and rejoicings,
to which an infinite concourse of lords and ladies resorted from all
quarters; no knight that was held in repute for valour and deeds of arms
was absent. When the banquet, which was furnished with all rare meats
and drinks that the heart of man could desire, was finished, then the
company addressed themselves to feats of arms. First came forth Sir
Marinell and six knights with him, declaring to hold the field against
all comers, in right of Florimell, and to affirm that she was the
fairest of all the ladies upon earth. Against these there came from all
parts such as desired to try their fortune in the lists—none were
debarred. Many feats of arms were wrought that day; many knights were
unhorsed, and some were wounded; but none, so it was judged by common
consent, bore themselves more bravely than did Sir Marinell. His name,
therefore, did the heralds proclaim as the champion of the day. And on
the second day the event was the same. There was much fighting, many
suffered loss and overthrow; and in the end the heralds proclaimed, as
they had done before, the victory of Sir Marinell. But on the third day
things fell out otherwise, for the knight pursuing his adversaries when
he had put them to flight, somewhat rashly, was surrounded by them and
taken prisoner. While they were leading him away, it so chanced that Sir
Artegall came into the tilting-yard, and close behind him followed
Bragadocchio, who had in his company the false Florimell.

When Sir Artegall understood what mishap had befallen Sir Marinell, he
said to Bragadocchio: “I would fain help this brave knight; but I would
not have anyone know who I am: therefore, I pray thee, change shields
with me.” And Bragadocchio full willingly did so, thinking that he might
thus win to himself renown without cost or danger. Sir Artegall,
therefore, taking Bragadocchio’s shield, set upon the knights who were
leading away Sir Marinell. There were a hundred in all. Of these fifty
assailed him, and the other fifty stayed behind to guard the prisoner.
But for all that there were so many they could not stand against him.
The fifty who assailed him he speedily put to flight, and the fifty who
would have kept the prisoner did not hinder Sir Artegall from setting
him free. Then Sir Marinell being delivered and armed anew, for they had
taken his arms from him, the two joined their forces and drove their
adversaries out of the field. There was not one among them who could
hold up his head or make a stand against them. When Sir Artegall had
accomplished this, then he gave back the shield to Bragadocchio, who had
stayed to see the issue of the day, keeping with him the false
Florimell.

After this the trumpets sounded, and the judges rose up in their place
and summoned the company, saying: “Hear! All ye knights who have borne
arms to-day, and know to whom the prize of valour is awarded.” Then came
forth the fair Florimell from the place where she sat, as queen of the
tourney, that she might give to each knight his proper guerdon, and to
him who should be held to have best acquitted himself, the first prize
of all. Loudly did they call for the stranger knight who had wrought
such prodigies of valour and strength in delivering Sir Marinell. He did
not come forward, but in his stead Bragadocchio presented himself, with
the shield bearing the device which all men knew—namely, a sun shining
in a field of gold. When the company saw this, they, thinking that this
was indeed the champion, set up a great shout, and the trumpets sounded,
and Florimell rose up and greeted him most graciously, thanking him for
his championship. But all this praise turned the vain fellow’s mind.
“Not for your sake, madam,” said he, “but for my own dear lady’s sake
did I this,” adding other words such as could not pass the lips of a
true knight. Then he called to Trompart his squire, saying, “Bring forth
the fairest of all dames!” Thereupon Trompart led forth the false
Florimell; for he had her in keeping, hidden by a veil from the common
sight.

Great was the astonishment of the company when they saw her. “This
surely is Florimell,” they said to themselves, “or, if it be not, then
it is one fairer than she.” Never were men more perplexed than the
guests that day. Nor was Sir Marinell himself less amazed than the rest,
and, as he gazed, the more and more steadfastly did he believe that this
false Florimell was indeed the true.

But now Sir Artegall, who stood in the press of the crowd, closely
disguised, heard the false boaster’s words, and could not contain
himself any more, but came forth and cried with a loud voice: “False
boaster, strutting thus in borrowed plumes, and doing dishonour to
others with your lies, verily when each shall have his due, great will
be your disgrace! ’Tis true that the shield which you bear was this day
borne by him who delivered Sir Marinell, but yours was not the arm which
struck the blow. And now hold forth your sword and let it show what
marks of battle it bears, and if you bear in your body the mark of a
wound, let this company behold it; nay, boaster, this is the sword which
won the victory, and these the wounds which were endured in the
winning!” And here he showed his sword, which bore the dint of many a
blow, and the wounds which he carried on his arms and his body. “And,”
he further said, “as for this Florimell of yours, I warrant she is no
true dame, but only a fit companion for such as you.” Then he took the
true Florimell by the hand and led her, she blushing the while, for the
colour on her fair face was of roses mixed with lilies, and set her by
the side of the false. And then, lo! a great marvel! The false dame
melted away as snow melts in the sunshine! In a moment naught remained
of her save only the empty girdle which once had compassed her waist. So
on a day of storm we see a rainbow spanning the sky with all its goodly
colours, and in a moment it vanishes from our sight, so did this lovely
creature, the false Florimell, vanish from before the eyes of that
company. And now Sir Artegall took up the golden girdle which alone
remained of all that fair show, for this, indeed, was true, while all
else was false. This he presented to the true Florimell, and she
forthwith fastened it about her waist. Many a fair dame before had
essayed to do it, but not one had found it truly and rightly fit.

But the end of these things was not yet, for now Sir Guyon came forth
from the crowd to claim his own good steed, which, as has been told, had
been stolen from him in time past by this false thief. With one hand he
seized the golden bit, and with the other he drew forth his sword from
its sheath, for he would have smitten the knave with a deadly blow, but
that the press hindered him, for now there was a great tumult in the
place. Thereupon Sir Artegall came forth and would fain know how the
knight had been robbed of his horse. Then Sir Guyon told the story how,
while he was busy setting right a grievous wrong, some knave had stolen
his horse. “And now,” said he, “I challenge the knave who robbed me of
it to deadly combat.” So he spoke, but Bragadocchio held back. He had no
liking for such things.

Then said Sir Artegall: “This is truly the law of knighthood, that if
one man claim a thing and offer to make good his claim by might of arms,
and the other will not, the judgment goes against the latter by default.
Nevertheless, for further and clearer discovery of the truth, can you
who claim this horse as your own declare some tokens in proof?”

To this answered Sir Guyon: “Most truly I can. Such a token there is: a
black spot in the beast’s mouth like in shape to a horse’s shoe.” But
when they thought to look into his mouth so as to discern the token, he
wounded first one and then another so sorely that they were like to die.
From no one would he suffer such a thing. But when Sir Guyon called him
by his name—Brigador—he, hearing the voice, stood still, as if he had
been bound, and suffered them to open his mouth, so that all could see
the mark as it had been described. Nay more, he would follow Sir Guyon,
breaking the band with which he was tied, and frisked right gaily, ay,
and bent his knee.

Then said Sir Artegall: “Now it may be plainly discerned that the horse
is indeed yours. Take it therefore, with its saddle of gold, and let
this boaster go horseless, till he can win a steed for himself.”

Much was Bragadocchio moved to be so shamed in the presence of all that
company—so moved that for a while he laid aside his very cowardice, and
broke forth into angry words against Sir Artegall. The knight made as if
he would have slain the knave with his sword, but Sir Guyon stayed him.
“Sir,” said he, “it would ill suit your dignity to vent your wrath on
such a knave as this. The meetest punishment for him is to be put to
open shame in the sight of all this company.”

But Talus was not minded to let the knave escape so easily. He caught
him by the neck and led him out of the hall, and shaved his beard, and
reft away his shield, and blotted out the escutcheon, and defaced all
his arms. Nor did the false squire, Trompart, fare better, though he
cunningly had essayed to fly, for Talus overtook him and served him in
the like way. So may all makers of falsehood fare!




                              CHAPTER XXIX
                       SIR ARTEGALL DOES JUSTICE


The marriage of Sir Marinell and the fair Florimell having been duly
celebrated with much rejoicing and great festivity, Sir Artegall set
forth again upon his travels. On his way, which for a while lay by the
seashore, he came upon two men who were wholly taken up with a great
quarrel. They were brothers, as might clearly be seen by the likeness
between them. Near them stood two fair dames who would fain have
reconciled them; but the brothers took no heed of their words, whether
they spoke gently or in threatening fashion. Between them stood a strong
chest, bound about with bands of iron; it seemed to have been much
battered, whether by the violence of the sea or by the chances of long
travel from foreign parts. It was indeed for this that the two seemed to
be contending, for now the one and now the other would lay his hands
upon it; so did they well-nigh come to blows, but the two damsels had so
far hindered them from coming to this extremity. Not the less were they
bent on trying their cause by the sword. It seemed as if it could not be
decided in any other fashion. But when they were on the point to do so,
notwithstanding all that the damsels could say or do, then did Sir
Artegall appear.

“Sirs,” said he, “are you content to tell me the cause of your strife?”
To this the two gave a common consent.

“Sir,” said the elder—Bracidas was his name—“our father, who was a
knight, Milesio by name, divided between us, by his testament, his
estate, that is to say, two islands which you see yonder. One is but a
little mount, but in years past it was fully as long and broad as that
which you see on the other side of the bay. To me he bequeathed that
island which you see to be so small; for the sea, as years have passed
by, has wasted it, and in so doing has largely increased the other, for
what the waves took away from my land they added unto his. There is also
this to be told. I was betrothed to that fair lady who stands yonder,
Philtera by name, and with her I was to receive a goodly dowry, so soon
as we should be linked together in bonds of wedlock. My younger brother,
whose name is Amidas, was betrothed to that other dame whom you see
yonder, Lucy by name. She had but small dower, but much of that which is
far better—to wit, goodness. Now when the lady Philtera saw that my
lands had been greatly decayed and the lands of my brother not less
increased, she deserted me and betook herself to my brother, who, that
he might receive her, deserted his own betrothed, to wit, the fair Lucy.
Thereupon this damsel, in her unhappiness, thinking it better to die
than to suffer such a contumely and pain, threw herself into the sea.
But while she floated among the waves, being, I take it, buoyed up by
her clothing, she chanced upon this chest which you see. And now there
befell her what has often befallen others in like case. She, who had
thought death to be better than life, when she saw his terrors close at
hand, changed her mind, and desired to live. Catching hold, therefore,
of this chest, she clung to it, and after much tossing by the sea, was
at last thrown upon my island, and I, chancing at that time to be
walking on the shore, espied her; and she being by this time much spent
with hunger and cold, and little able to help herself, I did, so to
speak, save her from death. And she, being not a little grateful for
this same help, bestowed upon me the dowry which fortune had given her,
to wit the chest on which she had chanced, and what was far more
precious, her own self. When we had opened the chest, we found in it a
great store of treasure, and took it for our own use. But now this
damsel, Philtera, maintains that this chest is hers by right, that she
was bringing it from foreign lands that she might deliver it to her
husband, and that she suffered shipwreck by the way. Whether this be so
or no, I cannot say; but this I do maintain, that whatever by good
fortune or by the ordering of God has been brought into my hands is
verily mine, I not having in any wise contrived the same. My land he
has, and also my betrothed, though of that I take no count, but my good
luck he shall not have!”

To this the younger of the two made this answer: “As for the two
islands, it is as my brother has said. I do not deny the truth. But as
for this chest and the treasure therein, which has been cast by the sea
upon his island, that I do affirm to belong to the Lady Philtera, my
wife, as she can prove by most certain signs and tokens, and I do claim
that it be straightway rendered up to her.”

Sir Artegall said: “It were no hard thing to decide this matter, if you
would refer it to the judgment of some just man. Are you content so to
do?”

“Yes,” said the two with one voice, “you shall be a judge between us,
and we will abide by the judgment that you shall give.”

“Then lay down your swords under my feet,” said Sir Artegall, and they
laid them down.

Then Sir Artegall, turning himself to the younger of the two brothers,
said to him: “Tell me now by what right you hold for yourself, and
withhold from your brother, the land which the sea has taken from him
and added to you?”

“I do so,” the man made answer, “because the sea bestowed it upon me.”

“You are in the right,” said Sir Artegall; “it is yours, keep it.” Then
turning himself to the elder, he said: “Bracidas, by what right do you
hold this treasure of which your brother and his wife affirm, and not
without reason, that it is theirs?”

“I hold it,” said he, “because the sea bestowed it upon me.”

“You also are in the right,” said Sir Artegall; “it is yours; keep it.”
Then, speaking to both, he thus declared his sentence: “That which the
sea has taken is his own. None who before possessed it has claim upon
it. He may bestow it as he will. The land which he took from Sir
Bracidas he gave to Sir Amidas; let it therefore remain in his hand. The
treasure which he took from Sir Amidas, or from the Lady Philtera, his
wife, he gave to Sir Bracidas; let him also keep it.”

The matter being settled, the knight went on his way. After a while he
espied a great rout of people, and turned aside from the road that he
might discover what it might mean. When he came near he saw a great
crowd of women, in warlike array, with weapons in their hands. And in
the midst of them he saw a knight, with his hands tied tightly behind
his back, and a halter about his neck; his face was covered, but his
head was bare. It was plain that the man was about to be hanged. And, as
they went, the women reviled him in bitter words. When Sir Artegall came
near, he said: “Tell me, pray, what this may mean.”

To this they gave no answer, but made as if they would assault him.
Then, at the knight’s bidding, Talus went among them, and with a few
strokes of his iron flail sent them flying hither and thither. Then he
took the knight, who would otherwise have been put to death, and brought
him to Sir Artegall.

“Sir Turpine, unhappy man”—it so chanced that he knew the man—“how came
you into this evil plight? How is it that you suffered yourself to be
thus enslaved by women, who should rather be subject to men?” Sir
Turpine was sore ashamed and confounded, and could say but little in his
excuse for himself; but this was the story which he told.

“I was desirous, as was indeed my knightly duty, to find some adventure
which would be praiseworthy in itself, and also bring me to honour. And
I heard a report that there was a proud amazon who was accustomed to
defy all the knights of Queen Gloriana. Some she had put to shame, and
some she had slain. And the cause of her rage was this. She had loved
the bold Bellodant, and when he disdained her, then her love was turned
to hatred, not towards him only, but towards all knights, to whom she
worked, as, indeed, she still works, all the mischief that she can
devise. Any whom she can subdue, either by force or fraud, she treats in
the most evil fashion. First she takes from them their arms and armour,
and then she clothes them in women’s garments, and compels them to earn
their bread by women’s work, spinning and sewing and washing and the
like. And all the food that she gives them in recompense is but bread
and water, so as to disable them from taking their revenge. And if
anyone is of so manly a mind that he sets himself against her pleasure,
him she causes to be hanged out of hand on that gibbet which you see
yonder. And in this case I stood. For when she overcame me in fight,
then she put me into that base service of which I have spoken; and when
I refused, then she sent me with that rabble of women whom you
dispersed, that I might be done to death.”

“By what name do they call this amazon?” said Sir Artegall, “and where
does she dwell?”

“Her name,” answered Sir Turpine, “is Radigund; a princess is she of
great power and pride, well tried in arms and skilled in battle, more
than I could have believed had I not known it by my own experience.”

“Then,” said Sir Artegall, “by the faith which I owe to my queen, and
the knighthood which I bear, I will not rest till I have made trial of
this same amazon, and have found out for myself what she has of strength
and skill. And now, Sir Turpine, put off these unseemly clothes which
you wear, and come with me that you may see how my enterprise shall
prosper, and whether I shall avenge the cause of knighthood upon this
woman.”

To which request Sir Turpine consented with all his heart.




                              CHAPTER XXX
                                RADIGUND


Radigund the amazon dwelt a mile or so from the place where the gallows
had been set up, in a city which she had called Radigone, after her own
name. On the walls of the city were set watchmen to warn the queen of
the coming of strangers. One of these espied Sir Artegall and his
company, and gave warning accordingly, saying: “I see three strangers;
one of them is a knight fully armed, and the others have a warlike
look!” Thereupon all the people ran in haste to arm themselves, like to
bees when they come forth in a swarm from their hive, and Radigund
herself, half-arrayed as a man, came forth from her palace. Meanwhile
the three drew near to the city gate, and when the porter, thinking
scorn of them because they were so few, did not trouble to open to them
the gate, they beat upon it with many blows, threatening the man also
that he should suffer much for his insolence.

When the queen heard this she fell into a great rage and cried: “Open
the gate; these fellows shall soon know to what a city they have come!”
So the porter threw wide the gate, and the three pressed forward,
meaning to pass through. But lo! of a sudden there fell upon them such a
storm of arrows that they had perforce to halt.

“These women,” said Sir Artegall, “are stout fighters; let us be careful
what we do.” And when they halted, the rout set upon them more fiercely
than ever. As for Queen Radigund, when she saw Sir Turpine, and knew
that he had escaped from the doom which she had decreed for him, and was
now dealing blows to her women, she was carried away with rage, and flew
at him headlong, as a lioness flings herself at an ox, and dealt him so
fierce a blow as brought him headlong to the ground. And when she saw
him lying she set her foot upon his neck, with intent to make him pay
with his life for his disparagement of her authority. So does a bear
stand over the carcase of an ox, and seem to pause awhile to hear its
piteous crying. When Sir Artegall saw what had befallen Sir Turpine, he
made all haste to help him, and dealt the queen so mighty a blow that it
reft her of her senses; nay, but that she somewhat broke its force, for
she was expert in arms, it had laid her dead upon the ground. For a
while she lay without speech or hearing; then, recovering herself, she
would have assailed him with all her might, for never before had she
endured such disgrace. But when her maidens saw it, for a great company,
armed for battle, accompanied her, they thrust themselves between; for
they deemed that she was not wholly in fit condition for fighting. Thus
were Sir Artegall and Queen Radigund perforce kept apart. As for the
rest, Talus, with his iron flail, drove them hither and thither,
breaking their bows and marring their shooting, and they fled before him
as sheep fly from a wolf.

When evening came, Queen Radigund bade the trumpeters sound a recall, so
that the soldiers should cease fighting. All the people she made pass
back into the city; and she caused all them that were wounded to be
carried to houses where their hurts might be healed. Then Sir Artegall
caused his tent to be pitched, on the open plain, not far from the gate
of the city. There he and Sir Turpine took their ease, but Talus, as was
his custom, kept watch all the night. But Radigund was ill-content with
what had happened that day; never before had her pride been so rebuked.
She could not rest, but cast about in her mind how she could avenge
herself for the shame which had been put upon her that day, and that for
the first time in her life. After a while she made this resolve in her
mind; that she would meet the knight in single combat and make trial of
his strength, for that her people should suffer such waste and ruin as
she had seen that day was a thing not to be endured. Then she asked for
one of her maidens, Clarin by name, whom she judged to be most
trustworthy, and fit to do her errand, and said to her: “Clarin, go
quickly, and bear a message to the stranger knight, who has so
distressed us this day, saying that I will meet him to-morrow in single
combat, that we may see whether he or I be the better. Say also that
these are my conditions: If I overcome him, then he shall render me
obedience and be bound for ever to my service; and I, if he should
vanquish me, do promise to do the same. Go, therefore, taking with you
six of your fellows, arrayed as finely as may be, that they may be
witnesses of this covenant! Take with you also wine and meats, that he
may eat. Verily, if I have my will, he shall sit hungry many a day!”

So the damsel did as she was bidden, taking with her six companions, and
meat and drink also. When she came to the gate of the city she bade the
trumpeter blow a blast for warning to the knights. And when Talus came
forth, she said that she would fain speak with his master. So being
brought with her companions into the tent, she delivered to him the
message of the queen. Sir Artegall received her right courteously, and
when she had departed—not without gifts—he betook himself to sleep.

The next day the two adversaries made themselves ready for battle. Sir
Artegall was accoutred as knights commonly are; not so Queen Radigund.
She wore a purple cloak, embroidered with silver, with ribands of
diverse colours, nicely ordered upon it. This cloak, for easier motion,
she shortened to her thighs; but when she pleased, she could let it fall
to her heels. She had for defence of her body a cuirass of chain-mail;
buskins she had, finely embroidered with bars of gold; at her side she
had a scimitar hanging to a most gorgeous belt; her shield was finely
decked with precious stones, it was like the moon when it is at the
full. In this guise she came out of the city gate, a noble sight to see;
about her was a bodyguard of maidens, some of whom made music with
shawms and trumpets. Her people had pitched a pavilion for her, where
she might rest till the fight should begin. After this Sir Artegall came
out of his tent, fully armed, and first entered the lists. Nor did
Radigund long delay to follow him. And when the lists had been barred
against the crowd, for a great multitude of people were gathered to see
the issue of the battle, the trumpets sounded the signal, and the combat
began.

The queen charged first in the most furious fashion, as if she would
have done her adversary to death out of hand. But he, having had much
experience in such matters, was not carried out of himself by her rage,
but was content to defend himself from her assault; the greater was her
fury, the more calmly did he bear himself. But when her strength began
to fail her, then he took the other part; even as a smith, when he finds
the metal grow soft, plies his hammer with all his might. Even so did
Sir Artegall deal blow upon blow as if she were an anvil; and the sparks
flew from her armour, and from her shield also, for with this she
guarded herself in right skilful fashion from his assault. But now
things began to go ill with her; for off this same shield the knight
with one stroke shore away a full half, so that her side for half its
length was exposed. Yet not one whit was she dismayed, but, smiting him
with her scimitar, wounded him on the thigh, making the blood flow
amain. Loud did she boast when she saw the blood, thinking that she had
wounded him to death; but he, provoked by her boasting, struck at her
with all his might, and when she put her shield to ward the blow, lo!
this was shattered altogether, and fell in pieces on the plain. Next, as
she was thus left without defence, he smote her again, this time upon
the helmet; so that she fell from her horse, and lay upon the plain,
like to one that was dead. When he saw her lying thus, he leapt from his
steed and unlaced her helmet, with intent to sever her head from her
body. But when he had unlaced her helmet, lo! her face was discovered to
him. So fair it was, even though covered with blood and sweat, that he
stood amazed; it was as when a traveller sees the face of the moon
through a foggy night. And at the sight, all the cruel purpose departed
out of his heart. So great was his pity that he threw his sword from
him, for, indeed, there is no heart so hard but that the sight of beauty
will soften it.

As he stood thus astonished, she recovered herself from her swoon, and
saw the knight standing by her side without a weapon. Then she lifted
herself from the ground and flew upon him with all her former rage. He,
indeed, could but ward off her blows with his shield, as well as he
could. And now, being without hope, he entreated her to withhold her
hand. “Not so,” said she, “till you have yielded to me your shield in
token of submission.” Nor could he refuse so to do. He had overcome her
in fair fight, yet now was he himself overcome by his own misdoing, for
he had of his own accord given up his sword, and so lost that which he
had attained. Then she struck him on the shoulder with the flat of her
sword, in token that he was from henceforth her subject. As for the
unhappy Sir Turpine, he was indeed born under an unlucky star, for they
took him back to the place from which he had escaped, and there hanged
him shamefully by the heels. Talus they could not take, for all that
they sought to lay hands upon him. He laid about him so unmercifully
with his flail, that they were right glad to let him escape. Many did he
wound and some he slew; the rest he put into great fear. Yet he would
not seek to rescue his lord. “Nay,” said he to himself, “Sir Artegall
has yielded himself of his own accord, and I must e’en let him be.”

Queen Radigund took the knight who had thus made himself her subject,
and despoiled him of all his arms and armour, and put upon him woman’s
clothing, with a white apron in place of a breast-plate. Having thus
arrayed him, she brought him into a great chamber, on the walls of which
were many memorials of other knights whom she had dealt with in the same
fashion. His arms and armour she caused to be hung up among these, and
his sword, lest it should work mischief to her, she broke in twain. When
he was come into this place, he saw sitting there many brave knights
whose names he knew right well, bound all of them to obey the amazon’s
law, and spinning and carding wool. This they did under constraint, for
they were bound to finish their task by the appointed time, nothing
being given them whereon to dine or sup but what they could earn by this
woman’s work. The queen set him in the lowest place of all, and put a
distaff into his hands, and bade him spin flax and tow. Truly it is the
hardest of all lots to be a woman’s slave! But he consented to her will,
saying to himself: “She vanquished me in battle, and I must abide by my
own word.”

After a while the queen began to feel the beginning of love for the
knight. Long time she strove against it, thinking shame to be so
overcome; but finding that her passion was not to be put away, she sent
for the same Clarin, whom she had before made her messenger, and said to
her: “Clarin, you see that fairy knight, who has been made my subject,
not by my valour, but by his own honourable mind. He gave me my life,
when it was lost; why should he suffer there in this cruel bondage? Why
should I recompense him with ill for so good a deed? I would fain give
him his freedom, yet in such a fashion that in giving it to him, I may
win his free goodwill. I would loose him, and yet have him still bound
to me, not with the bonds of violence and compulsion, but of benevolence
and love. Now if you can by any means win him to such a mood, but
without discovering, mark you well, my thought, you will win a goodly
reward from him, and have me also greatly beholden to you. And now, that
you may be able to pass freely to and fro, I give you this ring as a
token to Eumenias”—this was the keeper of the knights’ prison. “Go then,
my Clarin; use to the best all thy wits, employing both enticing looks
and fair speeches.”

So Clarin, promising that she would use her best endeavour to win Sir
Artegall to such thoughts as her lady desired, departed on her errand.
She had recourse to all the arts she knew to win his favourable regard,
and one day she said to him: “Sir Knight, you have had but an evil
fortune; you sit drowned in despair, and yet you might raise yourself,
if you were but willing, to something better.”

He was in doubt what this speech might mean, and so made answer: “Fair
damsel, that you regard me with compassion is in itself a kindness for
which I am in your debt. But you must know that a brave heart bears with
equal courage fair weather and foul, frowns of ill fortune or smiles of
prosperity. At this moment my life is overcast with cloud, yet I hope
for sunshine to come.”

“Yea,” answered the maiden, “and what say you if you should see an
occasion ready to your hand for entering on better things?”

“Truly,” answered Sir Artegall, “I count him to be unworthy of good
fortune who should not promptly take such occasion, so that it come
within his reach.”

Then said Clarin: “Why do you not set about to win your liberty by
seeking the favour of the queen? ’Tis true that she has passed her days
in war, yet she is not born of tigers or bears. She scorns the love of
men, yet she does not forget that she is herself of the kindred of man.”

To this Sir Artegall replied: “Believe me, fair damsel, that not from
obstinacy or disdain have I neglected to seek her favour. ’Tis lack of
means that has kept me back from so doing; and if you can in any way
supply this lack, then shall I be bound to you for ever.”

“This fish bites at the bait,” said the damsel to herself, “but it is
not yet surely caught.” But even while she spoke, she herself, foolish
maiden that she was, was caught herself. For, as a fisher who, while he
seeks for the prey, falls into the brook, so Clarin, seeking to serve
her mistress’s ends, conceived a great pity for this captive knight, and
from pity it is but a short journey to love. But her love she durst not
tell, neither to the knight, lest haply she should be disdained, nor to
anyone else, lest that by any means it should come to the knowledge of
the queen, for that she knew would mean a sure sentence of death.
Therefore she kept the matter in her heart, watching for such occasion
as might arise.

Queen Radigund, growing impatient of the delay, bade her unfold the
truth. “How have you fared?” she said, “What is the temper of the man?
Has captivity brought him to a more humble mind?”

“Not so,” said Clarin; “he is as stern and obstinate as ever. He scorns
all offers and conditions; he would sooner die—so he declares—than look
with any favour on those who have done him so great a wrong. This in
brief is his resolve; in truth these are his very words: ‘My body may be
thrall to the queen, but my heart is free.’”

When she heard these words the queen fell into a mighty rage. But coming
to herself, and perceiving that anger would profit her nothing, she said
to her minister: “Clarin, what remains for us to do? It were a shame to
have laboured in vain, and still more a shame to sit down content when
this fellow flouts us in such fashion. Nevertheless, that his guilt may
be seen to be the greater, and my grace the more admirable, I will bear
with this folly of his till you shall have made another trial of him.
And you I charge to leave nothing that can be done or said to work upon
him. Leave nothing unpromised that may help to persuade him. Tell him
that he shall have life, freedom, grace, and store of gifts, for by
gifts even the hearts of gods are touched. And to these promises add all
your arts and woman’s wiles. And if your arts avail nothing, then let
him feel the weight of your hand. Diminish his victuals; maybe he is too
proudly fed; put more labour upon him, and with harder conditions; let
him lodge less softly, lying upon straw; do aught that may abate his
courage and his pride; put a chain of cold iron upon him, and deny him
all that he may desire. And when you have done all this, tell me how he
bears himself. If need be, I will deal with him, not as a lover, but as
a rebel.”

All this Clarin heard, and made pretence to fulfil her lady’s commands.
But her mind was turned to quite another thing, that is to say, to play
her mistress false, and to gain the knight’s love for herself. To him
therefore she made as great a show of goodwill as she could, telling him
that she was making suit for him to the queen, that she should set him
at liberty, but that she could not persuade her.

“The more I entreat her,” she said, “the sterner and the harsher she
is.” Then from the knight she would go to the queen and say: “The more
grace I show, the more haughty and unbending is he.” As for Sir
Artegall, he spoke the woman fair, but never did he depart from his
loyalty to his own fair lady.




                              CHAPTER XXXI
                     HOW SIR ARTEGALL WAS DELIVERED


While Sir Artegall lay thus in evil plight under the tyranny of Queen
Radigund, the Lady Britomart was in no small distress of mind. For now
the latest date that had been fixed for his return was long past, and
yet no tidings of him had come. Sometimes she thought that some mishap
had befallen him in his adventure, and sometimes that his false foe had
entrapped him, and sometimes—and this was the most grievous fear of
all—that he had bestowed his love upon another. She knew no ill of him,
nor ever had heard any; yet could she not forbear to think ill. Now she
blamed herself, and now she condemned him as being faithless and untrue.
Then again she would think to herself: “Surely I have miscounted the
time,” and she reckoned the days and weeks and months again; and,
indeed, the days were as weeks and the weeks were as months. Also she
considered within herself what she should do; should she send someone to
search for him, and yet who could go on such an errand but herself? She
could not rest in her dwelling, no place could please her; yet that
which displeased her least was a certain window which looked towards the
west, for it was from the west that Sir Artegall was due to come. It
chanced then that as she sat at this same window on a certain day she
saw someone approaching at full speed. No sooner did she see him, though
she could not discern his face, than she said to herself, “This is
someone from my love.” And truly, when he came nearer, she perceived
that it was Sir Artegall’s groom Talus. The sight filled her heart both
with hopes and with fears; nor could she stay in her place, but ran
forth to meet him, crying, “Where is your lord? Is he far from here? Has
he lost or has he won?”

Talus, albeit he was made of iron, and was without feeling of pain and
sorrow, yet was conscious within himself that his news was ill, and
stood silent as if he would rather that she should discern his tidings
than that he should declare them. Then she said: “Take courage, Talus;
tell me what you have to tell, be it good or be it bad.”

Then he answered: “If I must tell my evil tidings, so be it. My lord
lies in wretched bondage.”

“How came that to pass?” said Britomart; “did the tyrant, his enemy,
vanquish him?”

“Not so,” quoth Talus, “no tyrant man did vanquish him, but a tyrant
woman.” Great was the rage of Britomart when she heard these words.

“And you are not ashamed, evil newsmonger, to come here with such
tidings of your lord’s disgrace?” And she turned her back upon him,
seeking her own chamber; and there with much self-torturing she spent
many weary hours.

The next day she sought out Talus again, and being now in a milder mood,
she said: “Tell me now plainly how came Sir Artegall into this
captivity. Does he woo this tyrant lady?”

“Ah! madam!” answered Talus, “he is in no state to woo; he lies in
thraldom, weak and wan; and yet, for the truth must be told, it was by
his own doing that he came into this state.”

Then Britomart’s anger was kindled again. “Are you not leagued together
to deceive me? You say that he came into this bondage of his own accord;
is he not then false?”

Then Talus unfolded the whole story of how Sir Artegall fought, and how
he was vanquished, not by the strength of his adversary, but by his own
compassion. When Britomart heard this same story, she was, so to speak,
torn asunder by anger and grief, nor would anything content her but that
she must straightway put on her armour, mount her horse, and ride forth
to deliver Sir Artegall, Talus being her guide. After they had ridden
for a space they came upon a knight who was riding slowly across the
plain, a man well stricken in years, and of a very modest and peaceable
bearing. He saluted Britomart right courteously, and she, though in her
sad mood she would sooner have remained without speech, answered him
pleasantly. Then he began to talk of many things, and she, though wholly
occupied in her mind with one matter, to wit, the deliverance of Sir
Artegall from his prison, made such replies as were suitable. After some
converse he said: “Friend, night is about to fall, and there are tokens
of rain in the heavens; will you not lodge with me at my house?” And
Britomart, seeing that the day was far spent, consented.

They rode therefore to the knight’s dwelling, which was, indeed, hard
by. There he most hospitably entertained them, both with good cheer and
pleasant conversation. When the hour of rest came, Britomart was
conducted to the bower where she should sleep. There she found grooms
who offered to undress her, but she would not doff her arms for all her
host’s entreaties. “Nay,” she said, “I have vowed a vow that I will not
take off these arms till I have taken vengeance for a great wrong that
has been done to me.”

When she made this answer, it might have been perceived that her host
was somewhat troubled. Nevertheless he took his leave right courteously,
and departed. Britomart watched all the night; if sleep seemed about to
settle for a moment on her eyes, she shook it off with a right resolute
will. And Talus watched also; outside her door did he lie in no small
trouble of mind, as a dog that keeps guard over his master’s chamber. So
night passed, but about the dawn, when the cock commonly crows for the
first time, Britomart perceived that the bed in her chamber began to
sink through the floor, and that after awhile it was raised again. And
while she waited to see what this might mean, though indeed it was clear
that it meant treachery of some sort, there came two knights to her
chamber door, with a rabble rout of followers after them. But these came
on a vain errand. Talus, having his iron flail ready to his hand, laid
about him with a right goodwill. They fled before him, both knights and
the rabble also. Some he struck to the ground as they fled, and others
as they strove to hide themselves in dark corners of the house.

Now the true story of the matter is this. This knight, who seemed so
gentle and courteous, was one Dolon, a man of great cunning and of an
evil mind. He had been a knight in his youth, yet had achieved no
honour; only by his craft he had undone many men who were better than
himself. Three sons he had, of the same temper as himself, full of fraud
and guile. One of these, the eldest in birth, Guizor by name, had been
slain by Sir Artegall in battle, not without his deserving, for he had
sought to compass some treachery. And now this Dolon would have taken
vengeance for this injury. Britomart he took for Sir Artegall, chiefly
by reason of the page Talus, with the iron flail, whom he had seen in
his company. The next day, so soon as it was light, Britomart departed.
And when the two knights would have stayed her going, and this on the
bridge where Artegall had fought Pollenté, she vanquished them. And one
she caught up in her arms, and carrying him to the bridge end, cast him
into the water, where he perished miserably.

After journeying awhile, Britomart, with Talus her guide, came to the
city of Queen Radigund. The queen, when she was advised of her coming,
was greatly rejoiced, for she had not had the great joy of battle for
many days, and it always pleased her greatly to have experience of a new
adversary. She commanded that a pavilion should be set up outside the
city gate for the new-comer. There Britomart rested that night, Talus
keeping watch, as was his wont, at the door. The townsfolk also kept
watch upon the walls. At sunrise the queen caused a trumpet to be blown
to warn the stranger that the hour of battle was come. Such warning
Britomart needed not, for she had slept but ill, so troubled was she in
heart with jealousy and anger. Then the two made ready for the combat.
But first the queen would have her adversary bind herself to perpetual
service if the fortune of the day should go against her.

But Britomart cried: “I will have no such conditions, no terms will I
accept but such as are prescribed by the laws of chivalry!” Then the
trumpets sounded again, and the two ran at each other with great fury.
It seemed to them who looked on that both the one and the other had
forgotten all their skill in arms, so possessed were they with rage.
They sought not to ward off blows, but only to strike. And, indeed, none
could have said who struck the harder.

At last Radigund, thinking that she had her adversary at a disadvantage,
dealt her a blow with all her might, saying at the same time: “You love
this man; here then is a token of your love, which you may show him; for
what could be a surer proof than to die for him?”

But Britomart answered: “Have done with idle words about my love,” and
though she was sorely wounded by the stroke, for the blade, breaking
through the shoulder-plate of her armour, bit to the bone, she gave in
return even more than she had received. The sharpness of the pain gave a
new force to her arm, and she struck the queen so fierce a blow on the
head that it broke through her helmet and laid her senseless on the
ground. Nor did Britomart wait for her adversary to recover herself;
but, urged by injured love and pride, and the fresh smarting of her
wound, with one blow cleft both helmet and head. When her guards
perceived this dreadful sight, they fled headlong to the city, but did
not so escape, for Talus, taking up his flail, entered at the gate along
with the rout of fugitives, and dealt death in every direction. Small
need had they, I ween, of a physician on whom one of his strokes had
lighted. Verily he had destroyed them all, but that the heart of
Britomart was moved to see such great slaughter.

“Hold your hand,” she cried; “it is enough!” Then she commanded that
someone should lead her to the prison where Sir Artegall was kept in
bonds. Much was she moved to see these knights in their womanish attire,
plying distaff and spindle. But when she espied Sir Artegall himself,
and saw how pale and wan and wasted he was, her heart was well-nigh
broken in her breast. Bitterly did she repent of her unkind suspicions:
this was no lover of women whom she saw before her in so sad a plight!

Then she bade take him to a chamber where he might put off these
uncomely garments, and put on the apparel that belonged to a knight, and
take again his arms and armour, of which there was a great store in the
place. Not a little rejoiced was she when she saw how he became again
like to the knight whom she had seen long since in the magic mirror.

For a while they tarried in the city, for he needed to rest, and she had
wounds which it was well to heal. And she, being now queen of the land
in the place of the dead Radigund, wholly changed the form of the
commonwealth. She did away with this same monstrous rule of women, and
ordered all things according to the ordering of nature, and showed such
justice and wisdom that the people gladly made submission to her
government. The knights whom she found in the prison-house she set free,
and made them rulers in the city, having first caused them to take an
oath to be loyal to Sir Artegall. There was but one thing that troubled
her: to wit, that her lover must now proceed on the errand to which he
was bound.

This he did in not many days’ time, Talus travelling with him as before.
After a while they saw a damsel on a palfrey, flying as fast as she
could, and two knights pursuing her also at their utmost speed; they saw
also how another knight was riding after these two. Each was intent on
his own business, the two knights on chasing the damsel, the single
knight on chasing the two, the damsel seeking if, by any means, she
could escape. But when she saw Sir Artegall, being at her wits’ end, she
turned her course towards him, hoping that he might give her help. The
foremost of her pursuers—pagan knights both of them—continued his
course, and with his spear in rest charged Sir Artegall. But there he
had met more than his match; the Christian was both stronger and more
skilful in arms, and drove him out of the saddle full two spears’
length, and it so chanced that in falling he lighted on his head, and so
was killed outright.

Meanwhile his companion had fared as ill, for the single knight
overtaking him, had compelled him to stand and do battle, in which
battle he was defeated and slain. This done, he still followed, and
taking Sir Artegall for the other pagan, charged him at full tilt. They
met with a great crash, and both their spears were broken, and though
neither was driven from his saddle, yet they tottered as two towers
which an earthquake makes to rock. But when they drew their swords to
renew the combat, the damsel, seeing that her two friends were like to
come to as ill an end as had her two foes, ran up, crying out: “Oh,
sirs, stay your hands till I shall tell you how the matter stands. ’Tis
I that have been wronged, and you have brought me help, slaying these
two pagans who were pursuing me. These lie dead upon the ground; what
quarrel have you against each other? If there be still any wrongdoer or
cause of trouble, truly it is I.”

When the two heard these words, they held their hands, and, lifting up
the visors of their helmets, looked each in the other’s face. And when
Sir Artegall saw the last comer, who was no other than Prince Arthur, he
was sure that he was a very noble knight, and said: “Pardon me, fair
sir, that I have erred in lifting my hand against you. I will make what
amends you will.”

“Talk not of amends,” answered the prince; “I was in equal error, taking
you for this dead pagan.” So they swore friendship, and made a covenant
of mutual help.

Then said Sir Artegall, “Tell me, sir, who were these knights that have
come by this bad end?”

“That I know not,” answered the prince, “but know that this damsel was
in distress, and that I sought to succour her. But doubtless she herself
will unfold the whole matter to us.”

Then the damsel told her story. “Know, sirs,” she said, “that I serve a
maiden queen of these parts, Mercilla by name, a lady known far and
wide, and envied also, for her prosperity and her goodness. Enemies she
has, and chief among these is a pagan prince, who is bent on
overthrowing her kingdom, yea, verily, and on slaying her sacred self.
To this wickedness he is stirred up by his evil wife, Adikia[2] by name.
’Tis she who, trusting in her power, moves him to all kinds of wrong.
Now my liege lady, being desirous of peace, and willing for sake of it
to give up something of her just right, sent me to make a treaty with
this same Adikia, so that there might be quietness in the land. Now, as
you know, it has been a custom of all time that such messengers have
liberty to come and go without hindrance or harm. But this evil woman,
without any offence given on my part, broke forth in railing upon me,
and not only this, but thrust me from her door as if I were a dog. Yea,
and when I had departed, she sent these two knights after me to take me
prisoner. To you, therefore, for myself and for the queen, whose
messenger I am, I render you most hearty thanks.”

When they had heard the damsel’s story, the two knights, Sir Artegall
and Prince Arthur, counselled together what should be done in this
matter. Of which consultation the conclusion was that they should punish
those who were guilty of this wrongdoing, that is to say the sultan and
his wife and the knights who lent themselves to do their evil will.
Further, they concluded to carry out this purpose in the way now to be
described. Sir Artegall should disguise himself in the accoutrements of
one of the dead pagan knights, and should take with him the damsel to
the sultan’s court, making as though she was his prisoner.

Sir Artegall therefore having donned the armour of one of the two
knights, took the damsel with him, as being a prisoner, and so came to
the sultan’s court. And the sultan’s wife, who chanced to be looking
from the window, saw them, and did not doubt but that her errand had
been performed, and sent a page who would show the knight what he should
do. The page therefore brought them to the place appointed, but when he
would have eased Sir Artegall of his armour, the knight refused, for he
feared to be discovered.

Meanwhile Prince Arthur, coming to the gate of the city, sent to the
sultan this message: “I demand that there be delivered to me the Lady
Samient”—this was the damsel’s name—“being the ambassador of Queen
Mercilla, whom you wrongfully detain in custody.”

When the sultan heard this message, he was filled with anger, and
commanded that his armour should be brought. This he straightway put on,
and mounted his chariot. This same was armed in dreadful fashion with
iron hooks and scythes, and was drawn by savage horses, whom he was wont
to feed on the flesh of men. The poor wretches whom in his cruelty he
slew, he was wont to give when they were but half dead to these beasts.
In this guise he came forth from the city gates, where he found Prince
Arthur awaiting him, mounted on his steed, with Talus standing at his
stirrup.

The sultan drove straight at his adversary, thinking to overthrow him by
the rush of his chariot, and that his horses would trample him in the
dust. But the prince perceiving his design, withdrew himself a pace, and
so escaped the danger. Nor was he hurt by the dart which the sultan cast
at him as he passed; this also he avoided, and it was well that he did
so, else of a certainty it had pierced either him or his horse from side
to side. But when Prince Arthur sought to approach the sultan, the
horses carried the chariot out of his reach, so swift of foot were they.
On the other hand, the sultan, having a store of darts ready to his hand
in the chariot, cast them at the prince, and with one of them pierced
the prince’s cuirass, and made a grievous wound in his side. So did the
combat rage between these two, the prince being at this disadvantage
also, that his horse could not endure the look of the sultan’s horses,
so fierce and fiery of aspect were they. At the last, finding that all
other means were of no avail, he drew the covering from his shield—a
thing which he was not wont to do save in the last extremity—and held it
so that the light shining from it fell full on the eyes of the sultan’s
horses. As a flash of lightning did it fall upon them, and they
straightway turned and fled. Nor could the sultan stay their flight. The
reins were of no avail; they heeded them not; and when he called to
them, they would not hear. Over hill and dale they carried him, he
vainly dragging at the reins, and cursing aloud; while the chariot,
swaying from side to side, tossed him to and fro. Still the prince
followed close behind, but still found no opportunity to strike. Nor,
indeed, had he need, for coming to some rocky ground, the horses overset
the chariot, and the sultan was torn in pieces by his own contrivance of
scythes and hooks. Then the prince took up his shield and armour from
where they lay, sorely bent and broken, upon the ground. These he
carried back to the city, and hanged them on a tree before the palace
door. When the wicked wife saw what had happened, she ran down from her
chamber like to one mad, saying to herself, “I will be avenged on that
damsel who has brought upon me all this trouble.” And she ran, knife in
hand, to the place where she had been put. But Sir Artegall stayed her
hand. And she, being made yet more furious, ran forth into the woods,
and there abode, in the form—so some men said—of a tigress. Sir Artegall
meanwhile vanquished the sultan’s knights, and established a new order
in the city.




                             CHAPTER XXXII
                         OF THE KNAVE MALENGIN


The two knights delivered the city, when they had ordered it anew, to
the Lady Samient, to hold for Queen Mercilla. This done, they would have
departed on their own business, but Samient was not content that they
should depart without seeing the queen, and this, overborne by her
entreaties, they consented to do. As they journeyed, the damsel said to
them: “There abides in this region a very sturdy villain, who is wont to
rob all the country round about; and carries the spoil to a rock which
he makes his dwelling, and to this place no man can get, so hard of
access is it. Also he is marvellously light of hand and nimble of foot,
smooth of face, and so subtle in his talk that he can deceive well-nigh
anyone.”

When the two knights heard this tale, they desired with one accord that
the damsel should take them to the place where this villain abode.

“That would I willingly do,” said she, “only that the going thither
would hinder your journey to Queen Mercilla.”

“Let not that stay you,” said the prince, and Sir Artegall gave also his
consent.

So they travelled onwards together. After a while the damsel said to the
knights: “We are close to the place!” Then Sir Artegall and Prince
Arthur consulted together what was best to be done. They agreed that the
damsel should sit by the robber’s cave, and raise a great uproar, and
that when he should come to see what was the cause of the disturbance,
they should set upon him, and hinder his return. So the Lady Samient
went to the cave, and there threw herself upon the ground, and then made
a great uproar, with much wailing and many cries of grief. When the
villain heard it he came forth from his den, thinking that something had
come in his way. A dreadful creature he was to see, with hollow eyes,
and long curling hair which fell over his shoulders, and a most uncouth
and ragged garment. In his hand he carried a long staff with iron hooks
at the end of it, and on his back he bore a wide net. This he used, not
for fishing in the brook, but to catch such prey as he desired on the
dry land, taking them unawares.

When the damsel saw this strange creature standing close by her she was
not a little dismayed, and cried out for help in good earnest. But he,
with guileful words, would have persuaded her that she had nothing to
fear; and then, while she listened, as she could scarce refrain from
doing, suddenly he threw his net about her, and lifting her from the
ground ran with her to his cave. But when, as he came near to the cave
mouth, he saw the two knights barring the way, he threw down on the
ground his net with its burden, and fled away: like to a wild goat did
he leap from rock to rock, and he ran along the cliff-side without fear,
into places where Sir Artegall, for all his courage, durst not follow
him. So the knight sent his iron man, Talus, to follow him. And when the
knave saw that the new-comer was not less swift of foot than he was
himself, and did not grow weary or scant of breath, then he left running
on the hills and came down again to the plain. And here he had recourse
to a new device, changing himself into various shapes. First he made
himself into a fox, but Talus was not slow to hunt him as a fox is
hunted; then into a bush, but the iron man beat the bush with his flail;
and from the bush he made himself into a bird, but Talus threw stones at
the bird, and with so sure an aim that he soon brought it to the ground,
as if it had been itself a stone. This Talus took from the ground and
brought it to the knights, and gave it to Sir Artegall, saying at the
same time: “Take it, Sir Knight, but beware! Hold it fast!” And lo! even
while he held it fast, it was changed into a hedgehog, and pricked the
knight’s hand so sorely that he threw it away. And the villain returned
to his own shape and would have fled. But when Talus perceived it, he
followed and overtook him and led him back. Then did he change himself
into a snake; but this Talus struck so heavily with his iron flail that
he broke all his bones, and left him dead for the fowls of the air to
devour.

After this they came to the palace of Queen Mercilla, as fair and noble
a palace as was ever seen upon the earth. The porch stood open day and
night, so that all comers might enter in. But a warder of giant form sat
there, to keep from entering all that harboured guile or malice, and
such as with flattery and dissembling work such harm in the courts of
kings. The warder’s name was Awe. Such as were permitted to pass in were
marshalled in the hall by another warder, whose name was Order. There
they saw many noteworthy things, and chief of all the Queen Mercilla
herself, where she sat on her throne, with a sceptre in her hand, a
pledge of peace and clemency. And under her feet lay a great lion, very
fierce of nature, but wholly tamed in that presence. So then the two did
obeisance, and stood aside while the queen judged affairs of state, and
ministered justice and equity to her people. Of all these affairs the
chiefest was the trial of a great lady who stood before the throne, most
fair and royally arrayed. Many accusations were brought against this
lady, the prosecutor being one Zeal. Nor could this be wondered at, for
this great lady was no other than the false Duessa. It was surely proved
against her that she had deceived knights, and brought them to shame,
and even to death; also that she had wrought upon two vain knights,
Blandamour and Paridell, to devise hostility against Queen Mercilla
herself. Sir Artegall was so moved by these accusations that, being a
lover of justice, he was firm in taking the contrary part against her.
Prince Arthur, on the other hand, was not a little touched by the
pleadings on her behalf. When all had been heard on either side, Queen
Mercilla gave judgment, and although Duessa’s guilt was clear beyond all
doubt, yet she, being true to name and nature, did not adjudge the
extreme penalty of death, but ordered that she should be so kept as not
to do any mischief more.




                             CHAPTER XXXIII
                           OF THE LADY BELGÉ


While the two knights tarried at the court of Queen Mercilla, being
entertained by her in the most liberal fashion, there came two youths
from a foreign land, praying for help for their mother, the Lady Belgé.
It was a piteous story that they told before the Queen Mercilla and all
the knights and ladies of her court. The Lady Belgé had been in former
days among the most fortunate of women. She had to husband a most worthy
and noble prince, of wide dominions and great wealth; she had also a
very fair progeny, even seventeen sons, fair children, and of great
promise. Anyone who saw them in those days would surely have said that
not Niobé herself, before she moved the wrath of Apollo and Diana, was
more blessed in her progeny. Now the beginning of troubles to this
honourable lady was that her husband died in his prime, before any of
his children had come to such an age that they could fill his place. And
because the times were ill-suited to a woman’s rule, she was constrained
to look for someone who should give her help and protection. Now there
was in those parts a monstrous creature, Geryoneo by name, son of that
Geryon who was slain by Hercules. He was terrible to look upon, and
marvellously strong, for he had three bodies joined in one, the legs and
arms of three men, as it were, to help him in the fighting. He, feigning
himself to be just and kind, proffered his service to the Lady Belgé
while she was yet in the first trouble of her widowhood, undertaking to
defend her against all enemies both from within and from without. This
proffer she gladly accepted, and he, for a time, kept the promise which
he had made well and loyally. But having established himself in the
country, and Belgé having given into his hands all the power, he began
to bear himself most cruelly. Many wrongs did he do to this most unhappy
lady, but of all the wrongs the worst was this, that he took of her
children, one after another, to offer up in sacrifice to a horrible idol
which he had made of his father Geryon. Twelve had he taken, one by one,
so that now there were left to the unhappy mother but five only. And
now, all other hope having been lost, she bethought her of the gracious
Queen Mercilla, and sent her two eldest sons to entreat her help.

When they had told their story there was for a while silence in the
court, no one caring to take this adventure upon himself. And when
Prince Arthur saw that no one offered himself, he stood forth and said:
“Grant me leave, gracious queen, to succour this distressed lady!”

“Readily do I grant it,” said the queen. Thereupon he began straightway
to prepare himself for his journey, for he would not lose time; even on
the morrow would he start on this adventure. And so it was. So soon as
the next morning came the prince set forth, not without gifts from the
queen. Sir Artegall he left to follow his own business, but the two
young sons of the Lady Belgé went with him, guiding him on his way.

It was but a short journey to the place where the Lady Belgé dwelt. The
tyrant had shut her out from the cities of her land, and from all the
pleasant spots; she had her abode in the midst of marshes and fens, and
was glad to find shelter in them from the cruelty of her oppressor. In
such a dismal region did Prince Arthur find her, living quite alone, for
her children had left her, seeking safety elsewhere. And she herself,
when she caught sight of a man clad in armour, made ready to fly. But
then, spying her own two sons, she took heart, and looked up joyfully,
for she knew that the stranger was come to give her help. Then she threw
her arms round the necks of the two lads as they knelt before her,
crying, “Oh, my sweet boys, now I seem to live again, so joyful a thing
is it to see you! Surely the sun shines brighter than its wont, thanks
to your coming and to the presence of this noble knight.” Then turning
to Prince Arthur she said: “Noble sir, who have taken all this trouble
to help a miserable woman, may heaven reward you for your goodness.
Reward have I none to give, for all that is left to me is bare life, and
that life so full of misery that it is more like to a lingering death!”

The prince was not a little moved at these sorrowful words, and sought
to comfort her. “Take heart, dear lady,” he said, “for help is at hand,
and these, your troubles, will have an end. But now come with me, and
find some spot where you may more conveniently dwell than in this
miserable place.”

“Ah sir,” she answered, “to what place shall I go? The enemy dwells in
my palaces, my cities are sacked, my towers are levelled with the
ground, and what were abodes of men are fields where the wild flowers
grow. Only these marshes, the abode of efts and frogs, are left to me.”

“Nay, good lady,” answered the prince, “think better things than these.
We will find some place to harbour us. And if it yield not itself
willingly, then will we compel it; for all that your adversary may do,
we will purchase it with spear and shield; and if not, then the open
field shall give us welcome; earth has a lodging for all its creatures.”
With such words did the prince encourage her, so that she made ready to
go with him.

They set out therefore and came to a city which once had been the Lady
Belgé’s own, but had been taken from her by her enemy. He had pulled
down its stately towers, closed its harbour, marred the trade of its
merchants, and brought its people to poverty. And he had built a great
fort from which he dominated the place. For a while the city had
resisted his tyranny, but had now submitted itself to him, so purchasing
life, but losing all else that is worth the having. Many things did it
suffer from his tyranny, but of all that it endured the worst was this,
that it was compelled to offer sacrifices of human life to a hideous
idol which the tyrant had set up in a chapel which he had built and
adorned with costliest fittings of gold and ivory. In this city he had
put a strong garrison, and in command of this garrison he had set a
seneschal, a very stalwart knight, who had vanquished hitherto all the
knights that had ventured to come against him. He had vanquished them,
and when he had them in his power he had dealt with them in the most
shameful fashion.

[Illustration: Prince Arthur slaying the Seneschal.]

When the Lady Belgé knew the place, she said to the prince, “Oh, sir,
beware what you venture; very many knights have been undone at this
place.” To this warning he paid no heed, but riding up to the wall of
the city, called to the watchmen, “I challenge to single combat the
seneschal of this fortress.” Nor did the man delay to come, but donning
his armour, rode forth from the city gate. The two combatants met in
full tilt in the open field, charging each the other with his spear full
upon the shield. But the spear of the seneschal made no way, of so pure
and well-refined a metal was the prince’s shield. Broken was it into
pieces without number. But the spear of the prince passed through the
pagan’s cuirass, and made a deep wound in his body, so that he fell from
his horse to the ground. There the prince left him to lie, for he was
dead almost before he touched the ground, and rode straight to the
fortress seeking entrance. But as he rode he spied three knights
advancing towards him at the top speed of their horses. All three
charged him at once, all aiming their spears at one place in his armour.
But the prince did not swerve from his straight seat in his saddle, no,
not by a hair’s-breadth. Firm as a tower he sat, and with his spear he
smote that one of the three who had the middle place. Nor was his
smiting in vain, for he drove the spear through the shield and through
the side of the man, so that he fell dead straight-way on his
mother-earth. When his fellows saw how easily he had been overcome, they
fled away as fast as their steeds could carry them. But the prince
followed yet faster, and overtook them hard by the city gate. There, as
they hasted to enter, one hindered the other, and the prince slew the
hindmost. The third, striving to shut the gate in his adversary’s face,
was hindered by the carcase of his companion, for it lay in the way. So
he fled into the hall which stood at the entering in of the gate, hoping
so to save himself, but the prince following hard after him, slew him
there. When they that were left of the garrison saw how it had gone with
these three, they were sore afraid, and fled in great terror, escaping
by a postern door. When the prince found no more to oppose him, he
returned to the Lady Belgé, and brought her into the city, her two sons
being with her. Many thanks did she render for the good service which he
had done her.

When the tidings of what had befallen the seneschal and his knights came
to the sultan, he was carried out of himself with rage. Nevertheless
there was something of fear mingled with his rage, for his conscience
smote him with the thought that the recompense of his evil deeds was at
hand. Nevertheless he comforted himself with this: “There is but one of
them, and he cannot always prevail.” Therefore he armed himself: also he
took with him all the followers that he had, and marched to the gate of
the city, and there demanded entrance, saying, “Yield me up this place
straightway, for it is my own.”

To this summons the prince made no answer, but rode forth through the
gate, ready armed for battle. And being on the farther side he said,
“Are you he that has done all this wrong to the noble Lady Belgé,
exiling her from her own land in such fashion that all the world cries
shame on you?”

The tyrant answered, “I stand on my own right; what I have done, that
will I justify!” So saying he ran furiously at the prince, beating upon
his armour with a great battle-axe as if he would have chopped it in
pieces. So fierce was his onset that the prince was constrained to give
place awhile. So heavy were his strokes, one had thought they would have
riven a rock asunder. Also he had the advantage of his threefold form.
Three pairs of hands he had, and he could shift his weapon from one to
the other as occasion served. So crafty was he and so nimble, that an
adversary scarce could know where and when he should defend himself. But
the prince was his match and more. Ever he watched the motion of his
hands, and parried the blow wherever it might fall. And the tyrant,
being thus baffled again and again, roared for very rage, till, at the
last, gathering up all the strength of the three bodies into one stroke,
he thought to fell his adversary to the ground. What had happened had
the stroke come upon the man none can say, but it lighted on the horse
and brought him to the ground. So now the prince was constrained to
fight on foot, and the giant laughed aloud to think that he had him at a
disadvantage. But the fortune of the fight went not so. Now this arm and
now that did the prince shear away with his good sword, and he himself
was sheltered safe under his shield; so faultless was its temper, that
no blow could shatter it. And ever the giant was more and more carried
away by his rage, till, at the last, offering his whole side to the
attack of the prince, he was brought to the ground a corpse, nay, three
corpses, for all were smitten to death by the one stroke, and lay a
bloody heap upon the plain.

All this while the Lady Belgé watched the fortunes of the fight from the
city wall, with her two sons standing on either hand. And when she saw
the issue she hastened to greet him; the people of the city also, who
had waited to see to whom the victory should fall, hastened to do him
homage. Right glad were they to be rid of the giant’s tyranny.

When the Lady Belgé had rendered the prince her thanks, which he
received with due modesty—“’Tis not the strength nor courage of the
doer,” said he, “but the justice of his deed that should be looked
to”—she said: “O noble sir, you have freed me from my chief foe;
nevertheless there remains yet something to be done. I pray you not to
stay your victorious arms till you have rooted out all that remains of
this vile brood, and established my peace for ever.”

“Tell me, lady,” he answered, “what is this that remains?”

“Sir,” she answered, “in this temple hard by there is, as you have
heard, a monstrous idol which this tyrant set up, and to which he
offered up sacrifices, taking, alas! of my dear children, and many
children also of this people. Now in a cavern underneath this idol there
lies a most hideous monster, which is wont to feed upon the flesh of
these sacrifices. No man, they say, has ever looked upon its shape, so
fearful is it, and lived.”

When the prince heard this he was occupied with a great desire to deal
with this same monster, and demanded that the queen should show him the
place where it abode. “It is beneath the altar,” said she; and he
uncovered his shield, for the need was such as to demand the help. The
idol he saw, but not the monster. Then he took his sword, and with the
naked blade he struck three times, as if in defiance, and at the third
time the monster came from out its hiding-place. Hideous it was to see,
huge of size, as long, it seemed, as the whole chapel, with the face of
a woman and the body of a dog; its claws were like to lion’s claws; it
had a tail with a deadly sting, and eagle’s wings. Nevertheless, for all
its strength, it was dismayed to see the knight, and especially the
burning brightness of his shield. It would have fled again to its
hiding-place, but that the prince would not suffer. Seeing, then, that
it had to fight, the monster flew at the prince’s shield, and caught it
with its claws, purposing either to break it, or, if that might not be,
to wrench it out of his hands. Long did they struggle together, but at
the last the prince, with a stroke of his sword, shore off the monster’s
claws. Exceeding loud was the bellowing which it made, seeming to make
the whole chapel rock to its foundations. Next it struck at the prince
with its great tail, and well-nigh brought him to the ground; but before
it could strike a second blow, he had severed the last joint with his
sword. Last of all, it raised itself on its great wings and flew at his
head; doubtless it had hurt him sore but that he held his shield
between. While he so warded off the attack, he struck full at the
monster’s belly, and so did it to death.

Great was the rejoicing in the city when the people knew that the
creature which had oppressed them so long was slain. They crowned the
prince with bays, and led him through the streets with solemn pomp.
After this he tarried awhile in the city, establishing Queen Belgé on
her throne, and setting all things in due order, till the time came when
he had to depart for the completing of his task.




                             CHAPTER XXXIV
                     OF SIR ARTEGALL AND GRANTORTO


While these things were doing, Sir Artegall set forth to accomplish his
task, having Talus with him as before. After he had journeyed awhile, he
overtook an old man who was travelling alone, and perceived that he was
the same that had attended the Lady Irene when she came to the court of
Queen Gloriana. He had been a famous knight in his day, but had long
since foregone the use of arms, being stricken with age.

“Hail, Sir Sergis,” he cried, “there lives no truer knight, I know; but
tell me, what is your errand? How fares the Lady Irene? How comes it
that you have left her? Is she in prison? Does she yet live?”

“She lives,” answered the old knight, “but she is in sore trouble.
Trusting to your promise that you would come to be her champion, and do
battle with him who was oppressing her, she came at the appointed time,
but found you not. And now Grantorto has thrown her into prison, and has
appointed her a day, saying that if by that time no champion shall
appear to justify her and prove her clear of the crimes of which she is
accused, she shall suffer death.”

Sir Artegall was sorely troubled to hear these words, knowing that she
suffered these things through his default. “Verily,” he said, “I am to
blame for this fair maiden’s trouble, in that I was not present to
maintain her cause; but, as you know, I was not wholly to blame for that
which hindered me. But tell me, how many days has the tyrant allowed for
the finding of this champion?”

“Ten days he has given,” answered the old knight, “but he knows that
’tis only a form, for he guards all the coasts and approaches by which
such a champion might come. Indeed, he counts her to be already dead.”

“Turn again, dear knight,” said Sir Artegall; “surely, if I live, she
shall have the champion whom she needs within the appointed time!” So
they two went on together.

As they rode they were aware of a great rout of people who seemed to be
looking on at some affray. Coming nearer, they perceived a number of
rude fellows setting on a single knight, and chasing him to and fro as
if they would make him prisoner. And he, on the other hand, sought to
make his way to a lady who might be seen in another part of the field,
holding up her hands and praying for help. Wheresoever he turned they
gave way before him, yet ever returned and renewed their attack, and, so
great were their numbers, pressed him sorely. So harassed was he with
their assailing, that he threw away his shield, a most dishonourable
thing for any knight to do, and one that marks him with shame without
end. When Sir Artegall saw in what an evil plight the man stood, he rode
forward to his help, yet he was himself so rudely assailed that he was
constrained to give place for a while. But when Talus began to use his
iron flail, then the multitude fled for their lives, being scattered as
the wind scatters the chaff on a threshing-floor. When the knight had
given thanks for his deliverance, Sir Artegall said to him:

“What is the occasion of this uproar? Who are you, and who are these
villains that attacked you so furiously?”

The knight answered: “My name is Burbon; I have won honour as a knight,
and have been in good repute till of late trouble has overtaken me. This
lady is by name Fleur de Lys; my love she is, though of late she has
scorned me; I know not whether by her own choice or by constraint of
others. It cannot be denied that she was once betrothed to me of her own
free choice; but a certain tyrant, whom men call Grantorto, won her by
gifts and lying words. This host of villains he sent to take her away
from me by open force.”

Then said Sir Artegall: “I see, Sir Knight, that you have suffered
grievous things, yet not without fault of your own. But let us first rid
you of these villains. That done, we can make a settlement of other
matters.”

This then they did, Talus greatly helping with his flail. But when they
came to the lady, who had been left by them who had taken her prisoner,
they were in no little doubt in what mind she was, for she seemed to be
neither glad nor sorry. One thing was certain, to wit, that she was
wondrous fair and clad in splendid robes. When Sir Burbon, lighting from
his horse, ran to her and would have clasped her in his arms, she turned
from him in high disdain. “Begone,” she cried, “and touch me not.” Then
said Sir Artegall: “Fair lady, you cast a very great blemish on your
beauty, if you change a plighted faith. Is there aught on earth so dear
and so precious as faith and honour? Love surely is dearer than life,
and fame is more to be desired than gold; but a plighted troth is more
to be honoured than even love or fame.” At this rebuke the lady seemed
much abashed, and Sir Burbon, lifting her in his arms, set her on her
steed, nor did she repulse him. So they rode away, but whether wholly
agreed or not, no one can say.

These matters being accomplished, Sir Artegall with Sir Sergis pursued
his journey till they came to the seashore. There by good fortune they
found a ship ready equipped for sailing. This they hired, that it should
take them whither they would, and embarking in it, found wind and
weather serve them so well that in a single day they came to the land
which they sought. There they saw drawn up on the shore great hosts of
men who should hinder them from landing. But they did not for this
forego their purpose. So soon as they approached so near to the shore
that they could see the bottom beneath the waves, Talus leapt from the
ship into the sea. The enemy sought to overwhelm him with stones and
darts, but he heeded them not at all. Wading through the waves he came
to the shore, and once having put his foot upon the land, chased all the
multitude away, even as an eagle chases a flock of doves. The way being
thus made clear, for there was now no one to hinder them, Sir Artegall
and the old knight landed, and made their way to a city that was hard
by. The tyrant Grantorto, being made aware of their coming by some of
those that had fled from Talus, gathered a host of men and came against
them. But these also did Talus discomfit with his flail, pursuing them
till Artegall himself bade him hold his hand, for he would settle the
quarrel in more orderly fashion. Therefore he called a herald and bade
him take a message to King Grantorto to this purport:

“I came not hither to fight against your people, but to maintain the
cause of the Lady Irene against you in single combat. Do you therefore
call your people back that they may suffer no further damage, but fix a
time and place for us two to fight together in the cause of the Lady
Irene.”

That night he pitched his tent outside the city, and would suffer none
to come near him; only Sir Sergis kept him company, and gave such
services as were needful. Now the Lady Irene had not heard of the coming
of Sir Artegall, and this being the day on which, lacking a champion who
should defend her cause, it was appointed for her to die, she arrayed
herself in squalid garments, fit for such occasion, and prepared herself
for her doom. But her mood was changed to joy when, coming to the
appointed place, she found Sir Artegall ready to do battle for her.

And now, the lists having been made ready, Grantorto came forth prepared
for battle. He was clad in armour of iron, with a steel cap, rusty brown
in colour, on his head, and in his hand he carried a huge pole-axe. He
was of mighty stature, standing up as a giant among other men, and
hideous of aspect. Very expert in arms was he, and of great strength; no
man had ever stood against him in fight and held his own.

Then the trumpets sounded and the two met. Fast and furiously did
Grantorto rain his blows upon his adversary. This was his manner of
fighting, to wit, to overbear his foe by the fierceness of his attack,
giving him no respite or breathing-time. But of this Sir Artegall was
well aware, and bore himself accordingly. It was as when a sailor sees a
storm approaching and strikes his sails and loosens his main-sheet. So
did Sir Artegall stoop his head, shunning the great shower of blows.
Small shame it is to stoop if a man shall thereafter raise his head the
higher. For a time, indeed, it might seem that the tyrant would prevail,
so heavy was the shower of blows that he poured upon him, and so many
the wounds which the great pole-axe made even through his armour. But
ere long the occasion came for which the knight had waited. When the
tyrant raised his arm high to strike what should be, he hoped, a mortal
blow, Sir Artegall smote under his guard and drove his sword deep into
his flank, so that the blood gushed forth in a great stream. Meanwhile
the blow of the pole-axe had fallen, and, despite the shield which the
knight had raised to defend his head, had bitten so deep that the giant
could by no means loose it again. Then Sir Artegall let go his shield,
and struck Grantorto on the head with such strength that he brought him
to the ground, and, as he lay, with yet another stroke severed his head
from his body.

Then all the people, glad to be rid of the tyrant, joyfully hastened to
pay their homage to Queen Irene. So she was established on her throne.
Sir Artegall tarried awhile to order all things in peace and justice,
Talus helping much in the seeking out and punishment of offenders.




                              CHAPTER XXXV
                  OF SIR CALIDORE AND THE LADY BRIANA


As Sir Artegall was returning from his latest enterprise, he met a
certain Sir Calidore, who was in high repute among the knights and dames
of Fairyland for his courtesy and honesty. These two had been friends in
old time, and now were right glad to meet.

“Hail, noble sir,” said Sir Calidore, “tell me, I pray you, how you have
prospered in your enterprise.”

And when the other had unfolded the whole matter in order, what
hindrances he had encountered, and what success he had achieved in the
end, “Happy man,” he said, “that have accomplished so great an
enterprise! You are at the end of your labours, but I am but beginning
mine, nor do I know where to begin; the way is all untried. I know not
what dangers await me, nor what provision I must make.”

“What, then, is this enterprise of yours?” said Sir Artegall.

“I pursue,” answered the other, “the Blatant Beast, a monster that,
having been nurtured in the regions below, has now come forth on the
earth to be the plague and bane of men. My task is to follow him, if
need be, all over the world, till I can destroy him.”

“Such a creature I myself saw,” said Sir Artegall, “after that I left
the Savage Island. It seemed to have full a thousand tongues, and with
all of these it bayed and barked at me; I heeded him not, and this
seemed to move him to still greater rage.”

“Doubtless,” answered Sir Calidore, “that is the monster which I
follow.”

“Go on and prosper,” said Sir Artegall; and so they parted in all
friendship and amity.

After Sir Calidore had travelled a mile or so, he came upon a squire, a
comely youth to behold, whom his enemies had bound to a tree. The same
loudly called on him for help, which he, without waiting to ask
questions, promptly rendered. When he had loosed his bonds he said:
“Tell me, unhappy man, how you came into this evil plight; who was it
that captured you and bound you in this fashion?”

“Sir Knight,” said the man, “be assured that it was by misfortune only,
not by fault committed, that I came into this condition. Not far from
this place there is a very strong castle, where they keep this evil
custom. No man may pass along the road—and the road so lies that none
may pass without leave obtained from them who hold the castle—without
payment of toll. And the toll is this—from every lady her hair, and from
every knight his beard.”

“As shameful a custom as ever came to my ears!” cried Sir Calidore, “and
one speedily to be overthrown! But tell me how it came about, and what
was its beginning?”

“In this castle,” the squire made reply, “there dwells a certain lady,
Briana by name; there is no one on earth more proud, and it vexes her
sorely that she loves a certain Sir Crudor, and that he will not deign
to return love for love, until she shall make for him a mantle lined
with the hair of ladies and the beards of knights. And she to gain this
end uses the castle, having for her minister in the matter a certain
Maleffort, who, indeed, does her will in the most cruel fashion. This
very day, as I journeyed by the road with the lady whom I love, this
Maleffort made an assault upon us. Me first he took prisoner, for I
could not withstand him, so strong was he. This done, he pursued the
damsel, binding me to this tree until he should come back. But whether
he has found her or not, I know not.”

While he was yet speaking, they heard a loud shriek from hard by, and
looking to the place saw the knave holding a lady by her garments and
about to shear the tresses from her head. When Sir Calidore saw this he
was greatly moved with wrath; the squire he left, and turned to pursue
the villain. “Hold!” he cried, “leave that evil doing, and turn to
answer me!”

The fellow, trusting in his strength, which, indeed, had never failed
him, answered him scornfully. “Who,” said he, “are you that defy me in
this fashion? You take this maiden’s part; will you then give your
beard, though it be but little, for her locks? Nay, nay, you may not
purchase them so cheaply.” So saying he ran at Sir Calidore in a mighty
rage, and rained upon him a great shower of blows. The knight, who was
well skilled in arms, held back awhile, standing on his defence, and let
him spend his strength. But when he perceived that he was failing
somewhat, then he began to press him; the more he gave way the more
strongly he assailed him. At last the fellow lost heart, and turned to
fly, hoping to gain the castle and find shelter. So he fled, Sir
Calidore pursuing; and now he had reached the gate and cried aloud that
they should open to him without delay. This indeed they who were within,
seeing in what extremity he was, made haste to do, but even as he stood
in the porch Sir Calidore dealt him a mighty blow with his sword, and
cleft his head from the crown to the chin. He fell down dead where he
stood, and when they would have shut the gate, they could not, for the
carcase blocked the way, and Sir Calidore entering in, slew the porter
where he stood. Then all who were in the castle set at him, but in vain;
he swept them aside full easily, as an ox, standing in a meadow on a
summer day, sweeps away the flies which trouble him. So he passed from
the porch into the hall, where the Lady Briana met him, and assailed him
with angry words, calling him villain because he had slain her steward,
and was now come to rob her of her possessions.

“Nay, nay, fair lady,” he made answer, “I deserve not these reproaches.
I came to abate an evil custom that you wot of. Such things do dishonour
to the laws of courtesy. I pray you, therefore, of your own accord, to
do away with this evil. Rather show kindness and hospitality to all such
as pass by this way; so shall you gain a glory that is better far than
earthly love.”

These words did but make her wrath more strong. “Know, sir,” she cried,
“that I disdain all this talk of kindness and courtesy, and defy you to
the death.”

“I hold it no shame,” answered Sir Calidore, “to take defiance from a
lady; but were there one here who would abide the trial with his sword,
gladly would I prove my words upon him.”

Then the lady in great haste called to her a dwarf who served her, and
taking from her hand a ring of gold, gave it to him, saying: “Take this
with all speed to Sir Crudor; and tell him that there is a knight here
who has slain my steward and done much damage to my people;” for it had
been agreed between them, that when urgent need should arise she should
send this ring. So the dwarf departed with the ring, and travelled all
that night. Meanwhile Sir Calidore abode in the castle, the lady being
now scornful, now angry, and he enduring her moods with all patience and
courtesy.

The next day, before the sun rose, came the dwarf, bringing a message
from Sir Crudor that he would come to her help before he had broken his
fast, and would deliver to her the enemy alive or dead; and he sent his
helmet as a true token. Greatly did the Lady Briana rejoice to have such
news, and behaved herself more scornfully than ever to Sir Calidore. He
took no heed of her ways, rather rejoicing that he should have someone
with whom to settle this quarrel. So he donned his arms, and waited for
the coming of Sir Crudor. Nor did he wait long. Right soon did he espy a
knight riding across the plain. “This,” said he to himself, “is the Lady
Briana’s champion,” and without staying to ask of anyone who this
new-comer might be, he rode forth to meet him. The two came together in
the middle of the plain with so strong a shock that both were rolled
upon the ground, each rider with his horse. Sir Calidore rose lightly
from the ground, while his adversary still lay without sense or speech,
but he disdained to do him any damage; it would ill become a courteous
knight to strike a sleeping foe. But Briana, where she stood upon the
castle walls, thought that her champion was dead, and loudly bemoaned
him, and made as if she would throw herself from the walls to the earth.

After a while Sir Crudor raised himself from the ground, but in listless
fashion, like to one who can scarcely rouse himself from sleep. But when
he saw his adversary, his spirit returned to him as before, and he
renewed the fight, hoping that he would fare better on foot than he had
fared on horseback. Long did they fight, dealing each to other fearful
blows. Not once, so fierce were they, did they pause to take rest. At
the last, when, as if by common consent, both lifted their swords high
in the air to deal what might be a final blow, and so finish the fight,
either for this champion or for that, Sir Calidore, being more nimble
and quicker of sight than his adversary, was beforehand with him, and
struck him with so sharp a blow upon his helmet that he brought him to
his knee. Nor did he fail to follow up his advantage, but redoubling the
fierceness of his strokes, brought him altogether to the ground. As he
lay there he would have unlaced his helmet, and given him his
death-blow, but the vanquished man begged for mercy. Then Sir Calidore,
mastering his anger, such was his courtesy, said: “Mercy I grant with
all goodwill. Do you learn not to treat strangers with such rudeness.
This ill befits a knight, for his first duty is to conquer himself. And
now I give you your life on these conditions, that you help to the best
of your power all wandering knights, and also give aid as you can to all
ladies in need.”

These things the knight, being thus delivered beyond all hope from the
fear of death, promised to do, and swore fealty to Sir Calidore as being
his liege lord for all his life. All this time the Lady Briana was
looking in great dismay and trouble of mind; and now Sir Calidore,
bidding her to approach, told all that had been agreed between him and
Sir Crudor. She was overcome by so great a courtesy, and thanked him
with all her heart, for indeed it was in her inmost heart that she was
moved. She threw herself at his feet, and declared herself to be wholly
bound to him. After this they all betook themselves to the castle, where
the lady entertained them in most joyous fashion.

The banquet ended, she said: “Sir Calidore, I do bestow this castle upon
you freely and without price, by way of token of how great is my debt to
you.”

Then answered Sir Calidore: “Lady, I thank you for this gift; but I am
not minded to take any hire or reward for any good deed that it may be
given me to do.” So he gave the castle to the squire, that he and the
damsel might dwell there. And when he had tarried there certain days,
and was now made whole of his wounds, he went forth again on his quest.




                             CHAPTER XXXVI
                       OF THE VALOUR OF TRISTRAM


As Sir Calidore went on his way he saw a young man of great stature
fighting on foot with a knight on horseback. Not far from these two
stood a lady, clad in very poor array. Sir Calidore would have inquired
of her the cause of the strife, having it in his mind to part the two
combatants, if this might be done. But before he could come at the
place, the youth had slain the knight, a thing at which he wondered not
a little. This same youth was very goodly to look at, slender in shape,
and of but seventeen years or so, as it seemed, but tall and fair of
face. He was clad in a woodman’s jacket of Lincoln green, embroidered
with silver, with a huntsman’s horn hanging by his side. He had a dart
in his right hand, and in his left a boar-spear.

“What means this?” said Sir Calidore. “You, who are no knight, have
slain a knight, a thing plainly contrary to the law of arms.”

“I would not wish,” answered the youth, “to break the law of arms; yet
would I break it again, sooner than suffer such wrong as I have of this
man, so long as I have two hands wherewith to defend myself. The quarrel
with him was not of my seeking, as this lady can testify.”

“Tell me therefore,” said Sir Calidore, “how things fell out.”

“Sir Knight,” answered the lad, “I was hunting in the wood, as I am wont
to do for lack of graver employment, for which my years are not fit,
when I saw this knight, who lies dead yonder, passing over the plain,
with this lady in his company. He was on horseback, but she followed on
foot, and when she lagged behind, as she must needs do, so rough was the
ground, then he smote her with the butt of his spear, taking no heed of
her tears and prayers. This sight I saw with no small indignation, and
being moved with wrath said: ‘Surely, Sir Knight, you should rather
takeup this lady to ride behind you than make her travel so uneasily.’
To this he answered in angry words, bidding me hold my peace, nor meddle
with things that concerned me not. ‘Or,’ said he, ‘I will whip you as a
malapert boy should be whipped!’ So after some angry talk, he struck me
twice with his spear, and I threw at him a dart, fellow of this which
you see here in my hand; nor did I throw it in vain, for it struck him
beneath the heart so hard that presently he died.”

Sir Calidore was not a little pleased with his manner of speech, so bold
and honest was it, and he admired also the sturdiness of the stroke
which had broken to such effect the coat of mail. And when, after
question put to the lady, he found that it was even as the lad had told,
he said: “I do not condemn this youth, but rather hold him free of
blame. ’Tis the duty of knights, and indeed of all men, to bear
themselves kindly and courteously to women, and he did well to maintain
this good custom. But now I would have you tell me, lady, if you will,
how it came about that the man whom he slew treated you in so unseemly a
fashion?”

“Sir Knight,” answered the lady, “I am loath to bring accusations
against the dead; yet I must needs declare the truth. This day, as this
knight and I were passing on our way, we came upon a glade in the wood
where there sat two lovers, a comely knight and a fair lady. The knight
my companion being taken with the lady’s beauty, bade me dismount. And
when I was unwilling to do so, thrust me out of my seat with violence.
Which when he had done, he said to the other: ‘Now, yield me up that
dame!’ And when the other—though, indeed, he was not prepared for
battle—refused, then he wounded him sorely with his spear. This he did,
though the other had proffered to do battle with him, if only he would
appoint a day when they might try their strength on equal terms.
Meanwhile the lady had fled into the wood, and had hidden herself to
such good purpose, that when my knight sought to find her, he spent all
his labour in vain. At this baulk he was greatly enraged. He would not
set me on his horse again, but constrained me to follow on foot, smiting
me with his spear if ever I lagged behind, and taking no heed of my
tears and complaining. So we went on till we fell in with this young
man, and he, being moved with pity at my evil plight, rebuked the
knight. How the matter ended you have seen for yourself.”

“This boor has received his due,” said Calidore. Then turning to the
lad, he said: “Tell me now who you are, and how you came to be in this
place. Never did I see greater promise in anyone, and I would help you
to bring it to as good fulfilment as may be.”

“Sir Knight,” the youth made answer, “it may be that the revealing of my
name and lineage may be to my hurt, for of such danger I have been
warned; nevertheless, so courteously have you borne yourself to me, that
I will tell you the whole truth. I am a Briton, Tristram by name, son of
good King Meliogras, who once reigned in the land of Cornwall. He dying
while I was yet of tender years, his brother took the kingdom. Thereupon
my mother, Queen Emiline, conceiving me to be in danger from this same
uncle, thought it best to send me into some foreign land, where I should
not be within his reach, if the thought of doing me a mischief should
arise in his heart. So, according to the counsel of a wise man of whom
she inquired in her perplexity, she sent me from the land of Lyonesse,
where I was born, to the land of Fairy, where, no one knowing who or
what I was, none would seek to do me wrong. I was then ten years of age,
and I have abode in this land ever since, not wasting my days in vain
delights, but perfecting myself in all the arts of hunting. But now it
is time, I hold, to look to higher things. Therefore, this being such an
occasion as might not again befall, I would entreat of you that you
advance me, unworthy though I be, to a squire’s degree, so that I may
duly learn and practise all the use of arms. And for this I have this
beginning, to wit, the arms of this knight, whom I slew in fair
encounter.”

Sir Calidore answered, “Fair child, I would not by any means baulk this
your honourable desire to follow the profession of arms; only I could
wish that I could set you to some service that should be worthy of you.
Kneel therefore and swear that you will be faithful to any knight whom
you shall serve as squire, and be true to all ladies, and never draw
back from fear of any deed that it may be fitting for you to do.” So
Tristram knelt down upon his knees, and took his oath to do according to
these words.

Thereupon Sir Calidore dubbed him a squire, and he bloomed forth
straightway in all joy and gladness, even as a bud opens into a flower.
But when Tristram besought him that he might go with him on his present
adventure, vowing that he would follow him to the death, Sir Calidore
answered: “I should be right glad, most courteous squire, to have you
with me, so that I might see the valour which you have show itself in
honourable achievement, but this may not be. I am bound by vow to my
sovereign, who set me this task to accomplish, that I would not take
anyone to aid me. For this reason I may not grant your request. But now,
seeing that this lady is left desolate, and is in need of safe convoy,
you will do well to succour her in this her need.”

This service the youth gladly undertook, and Sir Calidore, taking leave
of him and the dame in courteous fashion, set forth again on his quest.
He had not travelled far before he came to the place where the knight
who had been so discourteously treated by him whom Tristram had slain,
lay in a most sorrowful plight. He was bleeding from many wounds, so
that all the earth about him was red; and the lady sat by him weeping,
and yet doing all that she could with careful hands to dress his wounds
and ease his pain. Sir Calidore, when he saw this sorry sight, was
well-nigh moved to tears; from which, scarce refraining himself, he
said: “Tell me, sad lady, if your grief will suffer you, who it was that
with cruel hand wrought such mischief to a knight unarmed, for surely,
if I may but come near him, I will avenge this wrong upon him.”

The lady answered: “Fair sir, this knight whom you see here and I sat
talking in lover’s fashion, and this man charged him, unarmed as he was,
and dealt him these deadly wounds. And if you would know what manner of
man he was, he was of tall stature, clad in gilded armour, crossed with
a band of blue, and for device on his shield he had a lady rowed in a
summer barge across rough waves.”

When Sir Calidore heard this, he was assured that this indeed was the
knight whom Tristram had slain, and he said: “Lady, take to yourself
this comfort, that he who so foully wronged your knight lies now in yet
more evil case. I saw him with my own eyes lying dead upon the earth, a
just recompense for the foul wrong that he did to your fair knight. And
now bethink you what we may best do for this wounded man, how you may
best convey him hence, and to what refuge.”

She thanked him for his courtesy and friendly care, yet knew not what to
say, for being a stranger in that country she could not think of a
fitting place, nor could she ask him to carry the wounded man. This he
did not fail to perceive, and said: “Fair lady, think not that I deem it
a disgrace to carry this burden; gladly will I help you.” Taking
therefore his shield, and first pouring the healing balm, which he
always carried with him for such needs, into the knight’s wounds, he put
him thereon, and bare him, the lady helping, to a castle that was hard
by. And it so chanced that the lord of this castle was father to the
wounded knight, a man far advanced in years, who had been a famous
man-at-arms in the days gone by, and was of most courteous and
hospitable temper. Aldus was his name, and his son’s name was Aladine.
Great was his grief when he saw his dear son brought home in such a
plight.

“Dear boy,” he cried, “and is the pleasure with which I thought to
welcome you to this your home turned to such sorrow!” Nevertheless he
put a brave constraint upon his sorrow, and turned himself to entertain
his guests with all hospitality. To this welcome Sir Calidore made a
courteous return, but the lady, whose name was Priscilla, could not by
any means be cheered. She was daughter to a noble lord that dwelt hard
by, and had seen and loved this same Aladine, though he was of meaner
birth and smaller estate; and now she was much troubled, thinking both
of her lover’s perilous state and of how her father would take the
matter. So, while Sir Aldus entertained Sir Calidore, she sat and tended
the wounded man, and at the last, with infinite pains, brought him out
of the swoon in which he lay, and restored him to himself.

The next day, when Sir Calidore came to see how the wounded man was
faring, he found him not a little bettered in state of body, but anxious
in mind, especially for his lady’s sake, because of the displeasure
which her father might have concerning her love for him. Thereupon he
told to Sir Calidore the whole story of his love, and besought his help,
which he, much moved by pity for their sorrowful case, gladly promised
that he would give. This promise he most fully did perform. First he
went to where the carcase of that misbehaved knight lay upon the ground,
and shore the head from the body. This he took in his hand, and brought
the lady to her father’s house. He, indeed, was greatly troubled to
think what had befallen his child, and was much rejoiced to see her
again safe and sound.

Then said Sir Calidore: “Your daughter was like to suffer wrong from an
evil knight; but he suffered for his evil intent—lo! here you see his
head.”

Then did the noble lord most gladly receive her again to her home, and
Sir Calidore, after a short sojourn, departed again upon his quest.




                             CHAPTER XXXVII
                    SIR CALEPINE AND THE LADY SERENA


As Sir Calidore passed on his way he came upon two lovers, Sir Calepine
and the Lady Serena, as they sat talking together. They were abashed to
see him, and he, being the very soul of courtesy, made most humble
apology for so disturbing them. Then said Sir Calepine: “Sit down and
rest awhile, and let us talk together;” to which Sir Calidore
courteously assented. While they talked, the Lady Serena, tempted by the
fairness of the place, and seeking to make a garland of flowers, of
which there was great store, wandered away.

Thereupon the Blatant Beast, the same monster which Sir Calidore had it
in charge to seek, rushed out of a wood that was hard by, caught her in
his mouth, and carried her away. She cried aloud to the two knights for
help, and they, hearing her voice, started up to succour her. Sir
Calidore, being the more swift of foot of the two, overtook the beast
before it had gone far. Thereupon it cast down the lady out of its mouth
and fled. Nor did Sir Calidore delay to pursue the beast. “The lady,”
said he to himself, “will be cared for by her own knight; but as for me,
I must not abandon my quest.” How he fared in the pursuit will be told
hereafter; but we will follow in the meanwhile the fortunes of the two
lovers.

Sir Calepine found the lady in very sad plight, being sorely wounded on
both sides by the monster’s teeth, so that she lay upon the ground in a
swoon, as if she were dead. With much ado he brought her back to life,
and, setting her on his horse, held her up with his arms, till they
could find some place where she might rest and be healed of her wounds.
So they journeyed till they came to a river, on the other side of which
stood a fair castle, in which he hoped that he might find shelter. But
when he came to the water’s edge he found that the stream could scarce
be forded on foot. While he doubted what it were best to do, there came
a knight to the river’s side, with a lady riding on a palfrey by his
side. Thereupon Sir Calepine, with all due courtesy, made a request of
the new-comer, that he would take this wounded lady to the other side.

“Not so,” replied the other; “if you have no horse of your own you shall
have no help of mine. Go on foot, and let this lady do the same. Or, if
you like it better, carry her on your back, and so prove yourself a
man.”

The lady on the palfrey was much displeased at the rudeness of this
speech, and, pitying the plight of Serena, would have helped her with
her own palfrey. For this courtesy Sir Calepine thanked her, but, being
very angry with the knight, would have none of her help. Stepping down,
therefore, into the river, he held himself up against the stream with
his spear in one hand, and with the other hand stayed the lady on his
horse. All the while the discourteous knight stood on the bank jeering
and laughing.

When Sir Calepine had won in safety to the farther bank, he called aloud
to the other, saying, “Unknightly man, disgrace to all who bear arms, I
defy you. Fight if you dare, or never be bold to bear arms again.” But
the fellow took no heed of this challenge, but laughed aloud, as if to
say that his adversary was of so mean estate that a man of honour need
not trouble to regard his words. So, crossing the stream, he came to the
fair house on the farther bank, for indeed this was his house.

To this same house came Sir Calepine, for indeed there was no other
house where he could find shelter, and asked admittance for the lady’s
sake. But the porter said: “We find no lodging here for any wandering
knight, unless he is willing first to fight with the master of the
house.”

“And who is he?” said Sir Calepine.

“His name,” answered the porter, “is Sir Turpin; a mighty man and a
great fighter; he bears a great grudge against all wandering knights, by
reason of some wrong that was done him by such a knight in time past.”

Then said Sir Calepine: “Go your way to your master, and tell him that a
wandering knight craves shelter for a wounded lady, and that he is
willing to fight, but craves that Sir Turpin will, of his courtesy,
postpone this issue till the day following.” To this request no answer
other than had first been delivered was made, and Sir Calepine perforce
turned away, not knowing what else he could do. All that night he
sheltered the lady under a bush as best he could. The next day he went
on his way, hoping to find some more hospitable place, and walking as
before by the lady’s side.

But he was not suffered to proceed far; for Sir Turpin, filled with
hatred and malice, pursued after him and overtook him, and having him at
a disadvantage, for he had the charge of the lady on his hands, went
near to slaying him. Slain without doubt he had been, but for help that
came to him beyond all hope. A savage man, who dwelt in the wood,
hearing the lady’s cry, hastened to discover what had befallen. He was
as a brute beast, and had never before felt in his breast any touch of
pity; but now, seeing the knight so hardly pressed, was moved to help
him. Neither armour had he nor arms, being wont to strike with such
things as came to his hand, and for protection he had a magic charm,
which from his birth had made him proof against all wounds. He took no
thought how he could best attack Sir Turpin, but ran at him with great
fury. The knight struck him full upon the breast with his spear, but
made no wound. And when the wild man’s fury grew greater and greater,
and he caught hold of the knight’s shield, and the knight on the other
hand perceived that neither spear nor sword availed anything against
him, then Sir Turpin left his shield and his spear also and fled. Nor
had he then escaped but for the fleetness of his steed, for the savage
also was the fastest of runners. So near did he come that Sir Turpin
shrieked aloud for fear, a most unbecoming thing for a knight to do;
nevertheless, by the speed of his horse he escaped to his castle.

The savage man, therefore, seeing his labour of pursuit to be vain,
returned to the place where he had left the knight and the lady. Both he
found in very evil case, and tended them with all care, staunching the
bleeding of their wounds with juices of healing herbs which he found in
the woods. Also he took them to a dwelling which he had in the wood hard
by, and gave them such entertainment as he could, beds of leaves on
which to sleep, and wild fruits of the wood for food, for the savage man
never would slay any living creature.

But now there befell these lovers a great mishap. Sir Calepine, being
now whole of his wounds, was wandering in the wood, when he heard the
cry of an infant which a bear was carrying off in his mouth. This indeed
he rescued, but in the chase went so far that he wholly lost his way,
and could not by any means return to the place where he had left the
Lady Serena. Long did she wait for his coming, being in great doubt and
trouble as to what had befallen him, and when, after many days, he was
still absent, she purposed to leave the abode of the Savage Man. He
would not suffer her to go alone, but clad himself in Sir Calepine’s
armour—his sword the knight had put in some secret place—and so set
forth; nor, indeed, was ever a stranger pair seen in company.

They had not journeyed far before, by great good fortune, they met
Prince Arthur. To him Serena told all that had befallen her and Sir
Calepine, the misdeeds of Sir Turpin, and the wandering away of the
knight. And when Prince Arthur had heard her tale, he said: “You I will
bestow with a good and wise man, a hermit, who dwells in these parts. My
squire also, who has suffered no little damage, I will leave; as for
this discourteous knight who calls himself Turpin, I will punish him
forthwith.”

And this he did in most effective fashion, slaying him and hanging him
after by the heels upon a tree, that others might take warning by his
punishment.

And now shall be told what befell the Lady Serena, and how it came to
pass that she and her lover were found one of another. It chanced one
day as she walked in the wood with Prince Arthur’s squire that he was
set upon by two knaves, and she, doubting to what end the battle might
come, fled away on her feet, and, losing her way, could not by any means
return to the hermit’s abode. Being wearied out with long wandering, she
lay down in the wood to sleep.

Now there dwelt in those parts a savage tribe which was wont to live by
robbery. They did not till the ground, nor breed cattle, nor deal in
merchandise, but they lived by spoiling of their neighbours’ goods. And
they had this evil custom also, that they lived on the flesh of men,
devouring all strangers whom they might chance to find within their
borders. Some of these savages, as they wandered in the forest, chanced
to see Serena, as she lay asleep. Great was their joy to see her, not
for her beauty, but because she would make, they thought, so goodly a
meal. First they debated whether they should wake her or let her sleep.
And it seemed to them better that she should sleep her fill. “She will
be the better,” they said, “for her sleep.” Also they agreed together
that she should be offered in sacrifice to their god. “He,” said they,
“shall have her blood, and we, after the sacrifice, will have a goodly
feast on her flesh.” This they set about to do, and having built an
altar, they stripped her of her ornaments and robes and laid her upon
it; and the priest stood ready to slay her with a knife of stone in his
hand, when their evil purpose was baulked.

Sir Calepine, by some happy chance, had come to this same grove, which
they had fixed for the place of the sacrifice, and for the feast which
was to come after. He was still searching for Serena, and having
travelled far that day, had laid himself down to sleep. And now, there
being a great noise of bagpipes and horns, for with these they
celebrated the solemnity, he started up; and, looking through the
branches that were about him, saw the altar set, and the woman lying on
it, and the priest, stretching out his hand to slay her. Who she was he
knew not, but ran to her help, as was a knight’s duty, and the priest he
slew, and not a few of the savages that were gathered round, and the
rest fled like to doves that fly before a hawk. So did Sir Calepine
recover the lady of his love.




                            CHAPTER XXXVIII
                     OF SIR CALIDORE AND PASTORELLA


Now must be told what befell Sir Calidore in his quest. For many days he
pursued unceasingly the Blatant Beast. Over hills and through valleys,
through forests and across plains, he made his way, and wearied not. The
monster he suffered not to rest, nor did he rest himself, save only when
Nature commanded; for he feared disgrace, if haply should he, for reason
of sloth, forego his task, and the monster should escape. Therefore he
went from Court to city, and from city to country, and in the country
nothing would content him but he must search in every farm. On a day
while he thus urged the pursuit, he came on a company of shepherds who
were playing on pipes and singing country ballads, the while their
flocks fed near them among the broom bushes with their flowers of gold.
When he came near to them he inquired of them whether they had chanced
to see such a beast as he sought.

They answered him: “We have seen none such in this country, nor have we
anything that threatens harm to us or to our flocks. And we pray to the
good God that He will keep such creatures far from us.” And one of them,
perceiving that the knight was hot and weary, offered him drink, and if
he chanced to be hungry, something that he might eat. This courteous
offer he gladly accepted, and sat him down, well content with such
simple fare as suits the dweller in the country. When he had ended his
meal he saw a fair damsel who wore a crown of flowers tied with ribbons
of silk, being clad in a gown of home-made green which she had worked
with her own hands. She sat on a little hillock in the middle of the
company, with company of lovely maids about her, and round these again
was a ring of shepherds, piping and singing the praises of their queen,
for indeed she did shine as a queen in the midst of her subjects. Fair
of face she was and of just proportions, and commended her beauty to all
beholders by the modesty of her carriage. There was not one in the place
but honoured, and not a few sighed for her in love: but she had no
liking for anyone.

Greatly did Sir Calidore admire both her beauty and her carriage, for
they seemed to him to far excel the shepherd’s estate. “Surely,” he said
to himself, “this may be a princess who thus disguises her high
condition.” And even while he thought the thought in his heart, Love
took him unawares. So he sat musing, and, for a while, so taken was his
heart with this new thought, forgot the chase.

And now the evening was come and it behoved the shepherds to fold their
flocks. So there came an aged sire, Melibæus by name, who was commonly
reputed to be the father of the fair maiden—Pastorella was her name. So
indeed it was believed, but, in very truth, he had found her as an
infant lying in an open field, and taking her home, had brought her up
as his child, for child of his very own he had none. The old man said,
“Night falls, and we must fold the flocks.” Nor was there any want of
helpers to the fair Pastorella. Many were eager to manage her sheep, and
none more eager than Corydon.

Then Melibæus, seeing how Sir Calidore sat alone, seeming to have no
place of abode, and that night was now near at hand, said to him: “Fair
sir, I have but a humble cottage; yet is this a better lodging than the
bare field; I pray you to take up your abode with me this night.” To
which Sir Calidore gladly agreed, for indeed there was nothing that he
more desired.

A hearty welcome did the old man and his wife accord to the knight.
Shortly after, the fair Pastorella came back from folding her flock, and
they all sat down to sup in high content, and had much pleasant talk
concerning the shepherd’s life, the delights of which old Melibæus set
forth. “Let those who will seek after honour and wealth and the good
things of this world: I am content with what I have. My nights I spend
in quiet sleep, my days in honest toil. I take good care that the fox
shall not harm my lambs; I catch birds in snares, and fishes with hook
and net. When I am weary, I rest my limbs under the green tree; when I
am thirsty, I drink of the brook. Time was when I was not content with
these simple things, but must raise myself above my fellows, and seek
fortune elsewhere. So I left my home and betook myself to the King’s
Court, and worked for hire. But I perceived that in this life there was
vanity and discontent; after ten years, therefore, had passed, I came
back to my home and to peace, and I have learnt to love it daily more
and more.” While the good man talked, the knight was well content to
listen. Much he liked to hear such speech, but more to look at the fair
Pastorella.

After a while he said to the old man, “Good father, I would gladly rest
a while in this peaceful place. The ship of my life has of late been
greatly tossed by tempestuous winds and in stormy seas. Let it therefore
find haven here, and I meanwhile will meditate what course I shall
follow for the time to come. But I would not that my entertainment
should be a burden to you. Your simple fare and such lodging as you can
give content me well; but for these you should have fair guerdon.” So
saying he drew from his pouch a great store of gold, and would have the
old man take it. But Melibæus pushed it from him.

“I desire it not,” he said; “this is the thing that breeds such mischief
in the world. But if you are content to abide here and lead our
shepherd’s life, be it so; I am well content.”

So Sir Calidore abode in the old man’s house, delighting himself with
the daily sight of the fair Pastorella, and bearing her company whenever
he could find excuse. Very high courtesy did he show to the maid; but
she, having been used to more lowly things, held it in but light esteem.
This the knight did not fail to perceive. So he doffed his knightly
attire, and clad himself in shepherd’s dress, and laid aside his spear
for a shepherd’s crook. One had thought him another Paris when for
Œnone’s sake he fed her flocks on the Phrygian Ida. So did the shepherd
Calidore go day by day to the fields with Pastorella’s flock. He kept
watch against the wolf while the maid sported and played, and at
even—such is the might of love—he would essay to help in the milking of
the ewes.

These things were little to the liking of Corydon, who had long courted
the maid. He wore a scowling face and would complain that old service
was forgotten, and bore himself in most injurious fashion. Calidore, on
the other hand, never abated one jot of his usual courtesy, showing no
sign of rancour or offence, but rather seeking, as it seemed, to commend
his rival to the good opinion of the maid. So when they danced to the
piping of Colin Clout, and the others would have Calidore lead the ring,
the knight took Corydon and set him in his place. And when Pastorella
took the garland of flowers from her head and set it on Calidore’s, he
again put it on the head of Corydon, much to the youth’s content.
Another time, when the shepherds had games and contests of skill and
strength, the prize being a garland which the fair Pastorella had twined
with her own hands, Corydon stepped into the ring and challenged the
knight to a bout of wrestling. He was himself well skilled in the art,
and being supple and strong sought to put his rival to open shame. But
he was much mistaken in his man, for the knight far excelled him both in
strength and in skill, and gave him such a fall as well-nigh broke his
neck. Nevertheless, when Pastorella bestowed on him the crown, he passed
it to Corydon, saying that he in truth deserved it more, and that he had
prevailed by fortune rather than by skill. Thus did the knight, so
courteous was he and large of heart, win the fair maiden’s favour. But
there was nothing which advanced him more than that which is now to be
told.

On a certain day when these three, to wit, Pastorella and Sir Calidore
and the shepherd Corydon, went out into the wood to gather strawberries,
a tiger suddenly rushed out from a thicket, and with wide gaping mouth
ran at the maid. She, seeing herself alone, for her companions chanced
to be divided from her, cried aloud for succour. And when Corydon, who
was the nearer of the two, heard the cry, he ran to help her. But when
he saw how fierce a beast it was that was attacking her, his courage
failed him, and he fled, putting his life before his love. But Calidore,
who also had heard the crying, coming not far behind, when he saw the
tiger and the maiden held in his claws, ran at the beast with all his
strength, and first striking him to the ground with such a blow that the
creature could not stand under it, then cut off its head and laid it at
the maiden’s feet. Small wonder is it that she gave her love to a knight
so courteous and so bold. So for a while they abode in great content,
save that Sir Calidore had put out of his mind the quest on which he was
bound, concerning which quest he had sworn to the great Queen Gloriana
that nothing should hinder him from it.




                             CHAPTER XXXIX
                    THE END OF SIR CALIDORE’S QUEST


It chanced one day that while Sir Calidore was hunting in the woods—it
pleased him more to be hunter than to be shepherd—a company of lawless
men who never used the spade or plough, but lived by the spoiling of
their neighbours, fell upon the shepherds’ village, and spoiled their
houses and drove away their flocks. Many of the men they slew, and many
they led away captives. Among these was old Melibæus and the fair
Pastorella and also Corydon. These the brigands carried away to an
island where they dwelt, a close place, hidden with great woods round
about, meaning, when occasion offered, to sell them to merchants who
dealt in such wares.

When they had remained in ward for a while the captain of the brigands,
seeing Pastorella how fair she was, conceived a great love for her, and
when she spake him fair, would have had her marry him. This she was
ill-content to do, but could not devise any other means to stay his
importunities than to feign a sudden sickness. While she was making this
pretence there came to the island a company of slave merchants, who,
inquiring whether there were any of the wares in which they dealt, were
brought to the captain.

“Sir,” said the brigands to the captain, “here be the merchants; ’twould
be well that all the captives whom we have should be brought out and
sold for such a price as may be agreed upon, and the money divided in
equal shares.”

To this the captain could not but consent. The captives, therefore, were
brought forward, Melibæus and Corydon and the others, and the merchants
set a price upon them. This being finished, said one of the brigands,
“There is yet another captive, a very fair maid, for whom, without
doubt, you would pay much money, so beautiful is she to look upon.”

“Nay,” cried the captain, “that maid is not for selling. She is my wife,
nor has anyone any concern with her. She, too, is now so wasted and worn
with sickness that no one would be willing to pay for her a price,
however small.”

So he took them to the chamber where she abode. A poor place it was,
gloomy and dark, and the maiden was wasted and wan. Nevertheless the
merchants were astonished at her beauty. “The others,” said their
spokesman, “are but common wares. We will buy them, if you will, but on
this condition only, that we may buy this maiden also.” And he named for
her a price of a thousand pieces of gold.

The captain’s wrath was much moved at these words. “My love,” he cried,
“shall not be sold. With the others you may do as you will, but to her I
hold.”

“Nay,” said the one who was chief among the brigands, “you do us great
wrong. We have our equal share in her, and we demand that she be sold
with the rest.”

When he heard this, the captain drew his sword from its sheath, and
shouted that anyone who should dare lay hands on her should straightway
die. On this there followed a great battle. But first they slew the
prisoners, lest haply they should turn against the weaker side. Thus did
old Melibæus die and with him many others, but Corydon escaped. This
being done, the thieves fought among themselves; and soon the captain,
who was ever more careful of Pastorella than of his own life, was slain,
and she, being wounded with the same stroke by which he was bereft of
life, fell upon the ground, being hidden under a pile of dead bodies.
The captain being dead, the strife of which he was the beginning and the
chief cause soon came to an end. The brigands, searching among the dead,
found the maid still lived, though sorely wounded; they gave her,
therefore, such care as could be found in so rude a place.

In the meanwhile Corydon had made his way to the village where he dwelt,
and there he encountered the knight, who, seeing the house in which he
dwelt utterly spoiled and void of all inhabitants, was overwhelmed with
trouble and fear. To him he told the story of how he, with the rest, had
been led into captivity, and how the brigands had fallen out among
themselves, and how the captain had fought with the others, and had been
slain, and with him Pastorella, for so the shepherd believed.

For a while Sir Calidore was wholly mastered by his grief. Yet coming to
himself, he considered that Corydon had not seen with his own eyes all
that he had told, because he had fled away before the strife had so much
as begun; and so hope, which is ever hard to kill in the hearts of men,
sprang up within him, and he made a great resolve that he would find her
if she yet lived, or avenge her if she had died. He therefore said to
Corydon: “Come now, and show me the place where these brigands dwell,”
which thing Corydon was at the first unwilling to do; for he was not
minded to run again into the danger from which he had escaped.
Nevertheless Sir Calidore so wrought upon him that he consented to go.

The two therefore set out together clad in shepherd’s clothing, and
carrying each a shepherd’s crook; but Sir Calidore had donned his
armour. After a while they saw on a hill which was not far away some
flocks and shepherds tending them, and approached them, hoping to learn
something about the matter with which they were concerned. Then they
perceived that these flocks were indeed the same as the brigands had
driven away, for Corydon knew his own sheep when he saw them, and wept
for pity, being in grievous fear because he perceived that they who kept
them were none other than the brigands themselves. These, however, were
but ill shepherds, for they lay fast asleep. Corydon would have had Sir
Calidore slay them as they slept. But the knight hoped that he might
gain from them some tidings of her whom he was seeking. So, waking them
gently, he gave them courteous greeting. And when the brigands would
know who he was, he answered that he and his companion were used to the
keeping of cattle and the like, and now, having run away from their
masters, sought to find service elsewhere.

“Take service then with us,” said the brigands, “for this work is not to
our liking.” To this the two agreed, and took charge accordingly.

When night fell the brigands took them to the cave where they dwelt.
There Sir Calidore learnt many things which he desired to know, and
chief of all that Pastorella was yet alive. At midnight, when all were
sleeping sound, Sir Calidore, fully armed, for he had found a sword,
though but of the meanest sort, went to the cave wherein dwelt the new
captain of the band. It was indeed barred, but the knight soon broke
down the bars, and when the captain, roused by the noise, came running
to the entrance, slew him. Pastorella, being within, was at the first
not a little alarmed at this new intruder, yet was greatly comforted to
see again her own lover, and he also was overcome with joy, and catching
her in his arms, kissed her most tenderly. Meanwhile the thieves had
gathered together, perceiving that some new danger threatened them. But
Sir Calidore, standing in the opening, slew them as they approached. In
the end he utterly vanquished the whole company, and spoiled their
goods. As for the sheep, he gave them as a gift to Corydon. The fair
Pastorella he bestowed in the house of a certain Sir Bellamour and the
lady Claribell his wife.

Now must be told the true name and lineage of this same maiden
Pastorella. Sir Bellamour in former time had served a very great lord of
those parts who had one daughter, Claribell by name. This same lord had
promised her in marriage to the lord of Pictland, which was the
neighbouring dominion, thinking that the two domains might thus be
conveniently joined together. Claribell meanwhile loved Sir Bellamour,
who was a very gallant knight. So fondly did she love him that she
consented to a secret wedlock, having good hopes that her father might
relent. But when he continued to be hard of heart, she having borne a
maiden babe, was constrained to commit the child to a woman who waited
upon her. This same woman, taking the babe into the field, laid it under
a bush, and having hidden herself hard by, waited to see what should
happen, for she trusted that someone, hearing its cry, would take it up.
But first she noted that it had on its breast a little spot of purple
colour, like to a rosebud. After a while the shepherd Melibæus passing
by, heard the voice of the babe, and taking it from its place, carried
it home to his wife, who, being herself childless, gladly took it in
charge, and reared it for her own. No long time after the Lady
Claribell’s father died and left to her all that he had, and she having
now no cause why she should conceal her marriage, took Sir Bellamour
openly for her husband, and had lived with him in great content until
the coming of Sir Calidore into those parts.

And now Sir Calidore bethought him of his quest, that he must not delay
its accomplishment any longer, and, indeed, he feared lest he should
suffer in fame because he had put it aside in thinking of other things.
Now, therefore, he departed, leaving Pastorella in the charge of the
Lady Claribell, the same undertaking this care most willingly, for the
maid was fair and gracious, and was altogether one to be loved. Sir
Bellamour also, having a friendship for Sir Calidore, with whom he had
served the Queen Gloriana in time past, was glad to help him in this
fashion.

It chanced on a day that the Lady Claribell’s waiting woman, Melissa by
name, being the same that in time past had served her in the matter of
the new-born babe, was doing service to the fair Pastorella in the
matter of her attire. Being so engaged, she spied the mark on her bosom
and said to herself, “Surely this is the very mark of a rosebud that I
saw on the Lady Claribell’s maiden babe, and the years of her age, as
far as may be guessed, agree thereto.” Having this in her mind, she ran
straightway to the lady, her mistress, and unfolded the whole matter,
how she had noted the mark, and how the old shepherd had taken the babe
from the ground. That this shepherd and his wife had been as father and
mother to the maiden was of common knowledge. Nor did the Lady Claribell
delay to search out the matter with her own eyes, and, being satisfied
that this was indeed her very child, took her to herself with great joy,
as did also her husband, Sir Bellamour.

Meanwhile Sir Calidore pursued the Blatant Beast, and at the last
overtook him. The monster, having spoiled all the other places in the
realm, was wasting the church, robbing the chancel and fouling the
altar, and casting down all the goodly ornaments. When he saw the knight
he fled, knowing that he was in peril, yet could he not escape. In a
narrow place Sir Calidore overtook him and compelled him to turn. Sore
was the conflict between these two, for the beast ran at the knight with
open mouth, set with a double range of iron teeth, between which were a
thousand tongues giving out dreadful cries as of all manner of beasts,
tongues of serpents also spitting out poison, and of all other venomous
things that are upon the earth. Not one whit dismayed, the knight ran in
upon him, and when the monster lifted himself up on his hind legs, and
would have rent him with his claws, he threw his shield between and held
him down. Vainly did the beast rage and strive to lift himself from the
ground; the more he strove, the more hardly and heavily did the knight
press upon him. At the last, when the creature’s strength now failed
him, the knight put a great muzzle of iron with many links in his mouth,
so that he should no more send forth those evil voices. And to the
muzzle he fastened a long chain with which he led him, he following as a
dog, so utterly was he subdued. Through all Fairyland he led him, the
people thronging out of their towns to see him, and much admiring the
knight who, by his great strength and valour, had subdued so foul and
fierce a creature.

’Tis true that in after days, whether by some evil chance or by the
folly of those who had charge of the monster, these bonds were broken;
for even now the creature wanders about the world doing great harm to
all estates of men. For it must be known that his name is Slander.

But in the good times of old it was not so. So did Sir Calidore fulfil
his quest. And afterwards he lived in all happiness, as became so brave
and loyal a knight, with his wedded wife, the fair Pastorella.




                               FOOTNOTES


[1]The story may be read at length in _Stories from the Greek
   Tragedians_. Briefly put, it is this: Hercules slew the Centaur who
   would have carried off his promised wife. The dying monster gave his
   mantle, dyed as it was with his blood, to the woman, saying: “Keep
   this as my last gift: it will be a sure means of keeping your
   husband’s love.” In after years the woman, thinking that her husband
   had ceased to love her, sent him the robe as a gift, and he, putting
   it on, was so grievously burned by the poison that he died.

[2]Adikia = Unrighteousness.




                       BOOKS BY ALFRED J. CHURCH

  THE ODYSSEY FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
  THE ILIAD FOR BOYS AND GIRLS
                             TOLD FROM HOMER
                         _With colored illustrations. Each, 12mo, $1.50_
  THE STORY OF THE ILIAD
  THE STORY OF THE ODYSSEY
    _Cloth, 12mo, with illustrations after Flaxman. Each, $1.00_
    _In the new Standard School Library, without illustrations, each, 50
          cents._


  THE BURNING OF ROME
    A Story of the days of Nero. With colored illustrations.
                                                    _Cloth, 12mo, $1.00_
  STORIES OF CHARLEMAGNE AND THE TWELVE PEERS OF FRANCE
    From the old romances, with illustrations in color by George Morrow.
                                                    _Cloth, 12mo, $1.75_
  HEROES OF CHIVALRY AND ROMANCE
    With illustrations in color by George Morrow.
                                                    _Cloth, 12mo, $1.75_
  THE CRUSADERS
    A story of the War for the Holy Sepulchre, as seen by the Wandering
          Jew. With illustrations in color by George Morrow.
                                                    _Cloth, 12mo, $1.75_
  HELMET AND SPEAR
    With illustrations in color.
                                                    _Cloth, 12mo, $1.75_
  ROMAN LIFE IN THE DAYS OF CICERO
                        _Standard School Library, cloth, 12mo, 50 cents_


                     EVERY BOY’S AND GIRL’S SERIES

  A series of books which have been proved to have each its points of
  special appeal to young readers.

                       _Attractively bound in cloth, each, 75 cents net_

  The Adventures of Dorothy
    By Jocelyn Lewis   Illustrated by Seymour M. Stone
  Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
    By Lewis Carroll   With forty-two illustrations by John Tenniel
  Aunt Jimmy’s Will
    By Mabel Osgood Wright   Illustrated by Florence Scovel Shinn
  The Bears of Blue River
    By Charles Major   With illustrations by A. B. Frost and others
  The Bennett Twins
    By Marguerite Hurd
  Bible Stories retold for Young People (In one volume)

      The New Testament Story
    By W. F. Adeney, M.A.   With illustrations and maps

      The Old Testament Story
    By W. H. Bennett, M.A.   With illustrations and maps
  Boy Life on the Prairie
    By Hamlin Garland   Illustrated by E. W. Deming
  Children of the Tenements
    By Jacob A. Riis   With illustrations by C. M. Relyea and others
  The Children who ran Away
    By Evelyn Sharp   With illustrations by Paul Meylan
  Dogtown
    By Mabel Osgood Wright
                    Profusely illustrated from photographs by the author
  Eight Secrets
    By Ernest Ingersoll   Illustrated
  The General Manager’s Story
    By Herbert Elliott Hamblen   Illustrated
  A Little Captive Lad
    By Beulah Marie Dix   With illustrations by Will Grefé
  The Merry Anne
    By Samuel Merwin
                   With illustrations and decorations by Thomas Fogarthy
  Merrylips
    By Beulah Marie Dix   With illustrations by Frank T. Merrill
  Pickett’s Gap
    By Homer Greene   With illustrations
  Tales of the Fish Patrol
    By Jack London   With illustrations
  Through the Looking Glass
    By Lewis Carroll   With fifty illustrations by John Tenniel
  Tom Benton’s Luck
    By Herbert Elliott Hamblen   With illustrations
  Tom Brown’s School Days
    By An Old Boy—Thomas Hughes
                     With illustrations by Arthur Hughes and Sidney Hall
  Trapper “Jim”
    By Edwyn Sandys   With many illustrations by the author
  The Wonder Children
    By Charles J. Bellamy   Illustrated
  The Youngest Girl in the School
    By Evelyn Sharp   With illustrations by C. E. Brock
  The Railway Children
    By E. Nesbit   With illustrations by Charles E. Brock
  The Phœnix and the Carpet
    By E. Nesbit   Illustrated by H. R. Millar
  “Carrots”: Just a Little Boy
    By Mrs. Molesworth   Illustrated by Walter Crane
  Us: An Old-Fashioned Story
    By Mrs. Molesworth   Illustrated
  Cuckoo Clock
    By Mrs. Molesworth   Illustrated
  The Dwarf’s Spectacles and Other Fairy Tales
    By Max Nordau
                Illustrated by H. A. Hart, F. P. Safford, and R. McGowan
  The Story of a Red Deer
    By J. W. Fortescue
  The Little Lame Prince
    By Dinah Mulock Craik, author of “John Halifax, Gentleman”


              _Stories from some of Scott’s Novels, told_
                           By S. R. CROCKETT
                    _Author of “The Raiders,” etc._

  Red Cap Tales
        Stolen from the Treasure Chest of the Wizard of the North
        With sixteen illustrations in color by Simon Harmon Vedder
                                _Cloth, 12mo, $1.50 net; by mail, $1.67_

“In this simple recounting of adventures there lurks a really high art,
and not a little humor. Mr. Crockett is aiming to bring home to his
critical small audience the liveliness, the excitement, the breathless
adventuresomeness, of these great novels. He is luring his hearers on to
read for themselves. He tells them enough about the people and the
events to make them hurry to the books to fill out
details.”—_Churchman_.

“Not the least attraction of the book is the clear print, on good paper,
and the really superb colored pictures, delicately tinted and full of
artistic beauty. So far this is the best book we have seen in
anticipation of Christmas gifts, and it is not exorbitant in
price.”—_New York Christian Advocate_.

“Mr. Crockett has adapted Scott for the benefit of his own and other
peopled children, making a little story of each of the main incidents in
sequence, so that the outline and a good deal more of each romance is
presented. Characteristic interludes acquaint one with the
story-teller’s first audience, among them the dear little maid of
‘Sweetheart Travellers.’ The naturalness of their comment and criticism
will delight the reader as surely as will Mr. Crockett’s clever
rehearsal accomplish its purpose ‘to lure children to the printed book’
of his great original—and along with the youngsters many ‘oldsters’ (Mr.
Crockett’s word) as well.”—_The Outlook_.


                         THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                      64-66 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber’s note:

--Silently corrected obvious typographical errors; left archaic
  spellings unchanged.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAERY QUEEN AND HER KNIGHTS***


******* This file should be named 55765-0.txt or 55765-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/5/7/6/55765


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

